March 2010                                         No.4 (Revised October2010) 
Making Sense of the Manufacturing Belt: 
Determinants of U.S. Industrial Location, 1880-1920 
Dr Alexander Klein (University of Kent) and Professor Nicholas  
Crafts (University of Warwick) 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Making Sense of the Manufacturing Belt: Determinants of U.S. Industrial Location, 1880-1920 
Alexander Klein (University of Kent) 
and 
Nicholas Crafts (University of Warwick) 
Abstract 
This paper investigates the persistence of the manufacturing belt in the United States  around  the  turn  of  the  20th century  using  a  model  which  subsumes  both  market- potential  and  factor-endowment  arguments.    The  results  show  that  market  potential  was  central  to  the  existence  of  the  manufacturing  belt,  that  it  mattered  more  than  factor  endowments,  and  that  its  impact  came  through  interactions  both  with  scale  economies and with linkage effects. Market potential was generally much higher for  states in the manufacturing belt. Natural advantage played a role in industrial location  decisions through agricultural inputs which mattered for a subset of manufacturing. 
Keywords: factor endowments; linkage effects; manufacturing belt; market potential;  new economic geography 
JEL Classification: N61; N91; R12 
Acknowledgments: We are grateful to Gilles Duranton, Tim Guinnane, Tim Leunig,  Chris  Meissner,  Dennis  Novy,  Henry  Overman, Mark  Thomas,  Tony  Venables, Nikolaus  Wolf,  and  seminar  participants  at the AEA  meeting  in  Atlanta,  Bank  of  Italy, Copenhagen,  Stanford,  UC  Davis,  UC  Irvine,  Virginia,  Warwick,  Yale,  and  York and for their comments. 

========2========

1. Introduction 
Traditional  accounts  of  industrial-location  decisions  in  the  United  States  
during the early twentieth century pointed to a number of key factors and stressed that  
there were differences between industrial sectors.  Manufacturing industries were seen  
in  the  detailed  descriptions  given  by  sources  like  National  Resources  Committee  
(1939) as in some cases natural resource oriented (e.g., blast furnaces), in other cases  
tied  to  local  consumers  (e.g.,  manufactured  ice),  or  seeking  to  minimize  transport  
costs while exploiting economies of scale (e.g., automobiles).  These accounts have  
clear similarities to hypotheses that might be derived from Heckscher-Ohlin theories  
based on factor endowments and from new economic geography focusing on market  
access. 
Beyond  this,  descriptions  of  American  industrial  geography  also  sought  to  
understand the manufacturing belt.  The term „manufacturing belt‟ has long been used  
to describe the remarkable spatial concentration of industry in the United States that  
prevailed from the third quarter of the 19th century to the third quarter of the 20th  
century.  The area was an approximate parallelogram with corners at Green Bay, St  
Louis,  Baltimore  and  Portland  (Maine).    In  1900,  about  4/5th  of  American  
manufacturing output was produced in this part of the country which comprised only  
1/6th of its land area and a little over half its population.1 A remarkable feature of this  
manufacturing belt was its long persistence for a century or so from the Civil War. 
                                                  
1 
At a disaggregated level, it is appropriate to demarcate the manufacturing belt in terms of counties.  
Our analysis is at the state level; states whose territory is wholly or predominantly in the manufacturing  
belt  are  Connecticut,  Delaware,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Maine,  Maryland,  Massachusetts,  Michigan,  New  
Hampshire,  New  Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  Pennsylvania,  Rhode  Island,  Vermont,  Virginia,  West  
Virginia, and Wisconsin. 
1 

========3========

The advantages of being located in the manufacturing belt were partly seen as  
high  market  accessibility  which  was  particularly  advantageous  in  the  context  of  
realizing scale economies (Harris, 1954).  In addition to this, however, stress was also  
placed on proximity to suppliers and purchasers of intermediate goods (forward and  
backward linkages) while noting the importance of manufactured intermediates in the  
production of manufactures (Perloff et al., 1960).  A large market for intermediates  
was  seen  as  making  the  manufacturing  belt  a  very  attractive  place  to  produce  such  
goods  and,  in  turn,  better  access  to  intermediates  made  production  of  final  goods  
cheaper.  These  ideas  would  later  be  formalized  in  Krugman  and  Venables  (1995).  
There are no internal trade data with which to quantify flows of manufactured goods 
at the turn of the twentieth century but the maps derived from railroad freight data for  
the late 1940s by Ullman (1957) shows quite clearly that states in this area bought and  
sold  their  manufactured  goods  not  only  within  the  manufacturing  belt  but  
predominantly within state or to their neighbours. 
The  data  source  used  by  Ullman  illustrates  this  very  well  in  the  case  of  
automobiles, as Table 1 reports. Panel A shows that 70 per cent of passenger vehicles  
were exported from the manufacturing-belt states with over 50 per cent exported from  
Michigan  alone.  Except  for  a  very  small  percentage  coming  from  Tennessee  and  
Missouri,  the  intermediates  for  the  vehicle  producers  of  Michigan  came  from  
manufacturing-belt states, and especially from nearby ones. 
There is relatively little modern empirical work on determinants of industrial  
location  in  the  late-nineteenth  and  early-twentieth-centuries.    The  most  important  
papers are Kim (1995) (1999). Kim (1999) estimated the following equation based on  
the  Rybczynski  theorem for  production  of  2-digit  manufacturing  industries  across  
U.S. states for snapshot years between 1880 and 1987: 
2 

========4========

Y  = α0    +  α1Labor  + α2Capital  +  α3Natural Resources 
He found  that  factor  endowments  were  the  fundamental  explanation  for  the  
geographic distribution of U.S. manufacturing from 1880 through 1987.  High R2 for  
these equations were interpreted by Kim to mean that once factor endowments had  
been taken into account, there was little left to be explained.  Kim (1995) considered  
the relationship between spatial concentration of an industry (Localization) and plant  
size  (Scale)  and  raw-material  intensity  (Resource)  by  estimating  the  following  
equation for panel data for U.S. manufacturing industries for selected years between  
1860 and 1987:  
            Localization = β0    +  β1Scale    +  β2Resource 
He found that U.S. regional specialization in the late 19th and early 20th centuries was  
positively related to both variables.  Thus, the manufacturing belt was based on the  
rise of large-scale production methods that were intensive in the use of raw materials  
and energy sources that were relatively immobile. 
However,  these  papers  by  Kim  are  not  fully  convincing.2    Most  obviously,  
there are likely to be problems of omitted variables.  In particular, n 
o account is taken  
of market access or linkage effects which are taken to be important in the traditional  
literature. 
In this paper, we  
address this issue  
by using a version of a model originally  
proposed  by  Midelfart 
-Knarvik  et  al.  (2000),  which  incorpora 
tes  both  factor 
- 
endowment and market 
-access determinants of location.  This is estimated at the state  
level  for  U.S.  manufacturing  for  the  earliest  feasible  period,  1880 
-1920.    We  
operationalize  the  notion  of  market  access  by  the  use  of  „market  potential‟, the  
concept introduced by Harris (1954).  Our framework allows an explicit analysis of  
the roles of each of scale economies, backward linkages and forward linkages. 
                                                  2 
See also the critique in Combes et al. (2008). 
3 

========5========

   We model industrial location taking explicit account of interactions between  
industrial characteristics  and  regional  characteristics.    The  approach  that  we  use  is  
grounded in a model of production and trade that takes account both of input-price  
variations  resulting  from factor  endowments  and from  costs  of  intermediate  inputs  
and  also  of  the  spatial  pattern  of  demand.    We  try  to  explain  the  existence  and  
persistence of the manufacturing belt around the turn of the twentieth century in an  
analysis  of  the  shares  of  employment  in  2-digit  manufacturing  industries  across  48  
U.S. states using a newly-constructed dataset.3 
In  particular,  we  address  the  following  questions  relating  to  U.S.  
manufacturing at the 2 
-digit level. 
1)  Which factor endowments affected 
the location of manufacturing? 
2)  Did 
market  potential  influence  the  location  of  manufacturin 
g  through  
linkage effects  
and/or 
scale effects? 
3) How important were factor endowments and market potential, respectively,  
as determinants of industrial location? 
2. A model and an empirical framework      
An Empirical Framework 
We  wish  to examine  the  relative  importance of natural  advantages  and  market  
potential in explaining the lock in of the manufacturing belt region around the turn of  
the twentieth century. The literature offers two possibilities: an approach developed  
                                                  
3 
We do not seek to explain the emergence of the manufacturing belt which happened in the decades  
before the Civil War.  Our data do not permit analysis earlier than 1880. 
4 

========6========

by  Davis  and  Weinstein  (Davis  and  Weinstein  1999,  2003)  and an  approach  
developed by Midelfart-Knarvik, Overman and Venables (2000, henceforth MK).  
The  empirical  approach  developed  by  Davis  and  Weinstein  (Davis  and  
Weinstein  1999,  2003)  uses  the  home-market  effect  to  empirically  separate  an  
increasing returns model of economic geography from a Heckscher-Ohlin model of 
comparative advantage. Their argument is that in a world of comparative advantage, a  
strong demand for a good will make that good, ceteris paribus, an import. However, in  
an economic geography world of increasing returns, a location with a strong demand  
for  a  good  makes  it  a  preferable  place  to  locate  production  and  thus  the  location  
becomes  the  exporter  of  that  good.  This  „home  market  effect‟  of  demand  on  trade  
distinguishes  economic  geography  models  of  increasing  returns from  comparative  
advantage models. In the empirical analysis, the home-market effect is then captured  
by  a  variable  which  measures  the  association  between  changes  in  demand  and  
changes in output. If an increase in demand leads to more than proportional increase  
in  output,  then  the  mechanism  of those economic  geography  models is  confirmed.  
Otherwise, other theories are more relevant.  
Midelfart-Knarvik,  Overman  and  Venables  (2000)  developed  and  
econometrically estimated  a  model  of  the  location  of  industries  across  countries,  
which  combines  factor  endowments  with  geographical  considerations  based  on  the  
Krugman  and  Venables  (1995)  model.4 Their  approach  is  a  synthesis  and  
generalization of two existing approache 
s in the empirical literature: a literature which  
estimates  the  effect  of  industry  characteristics  on  trade,  and  a  literature  which  
                                                  
4 
The discussion is based on Midelfart-Knarvik et al. (2000).  
5 

========7========

estimates  the  effect  of  country  characteristics  on  trade  and  production.5 The  model  
generates  a  regression  equation  which  co 
ntains  interaction  variables  between  the  
characteristics of states and the characteristics of industries to determine the industrial  
structure  of  states. 
This  empirical  strategy  was  used  to  examine  the  location  of  
production in the European Union (Midelfart-Knarvik et al., 2000; Midelfart-Knarvik  
and  Overman,  2002), and  the  studies  confirmed the  importance  of market  potential 
forces in shaping the location of industries in the EU. 
We  have  decided  to  use  MK  methodology  to  investigate  the  relative  
importance of the market potential and natural advantages in explaining the lock-in of  
the manufacturing belt. The MK approach provides a simple, yet theoretically sound,  
empirical test which is richer than Davis and Weinstein approach since it enables us 
separately to estimate  the  effect  of  forward  and  backward  linkages on  the  
geographical  location  of  manufacturers.6 Moreover 
, it  explicitly  considers  how  the  
characteristics of states interact with those of industries which is a 
major advan 
tage  
compared with the  
appr oach of Kim (1995) who related the spatial concentration of  
production  only  to  industrial  characteristics,  namely,  plant  size  and  raw 
intensity. 
The MK Model7 
                                                  
-material  
5 
It is similar to Ellison and Glaeser (1999) but differs in the sense that the theoretical specification is  
derived from trade rather than location theory. 
6 
The  MK  model  has  limitations.    It  abstracts  from  imperfect  co 
mpetition  and  does  not  admit  the  
possibility of multiple equilibria so it is less complex than the Krugman and Venables (1995) model. 
7The exposition presents a shortened version of the MK model and closely follows Midelfart 
et al. (2000). 
-Knarvik  
6 

========8========

There are I countries, K industries and M primary sectors. The industries are perfectly  
competitive  operating  with  constant  returns  to  scale  technology  which  uses  both  
primary factors and intermediate goods as factor inputs. Each industry k in country i 
produces nik number of varieties. The number of varieties is assumed to be determined  
exogenously. The trade costs that industry k incurs when shipping goods from country  
i to j are assumed to be of iceberg type denoted as tijk. The value of each industry‟s  
production  is  determined  by  the  supply  of  factor  inputs,  the  prices  of  intermediate  
goods and the distribution of demand across industries.     
The product varieties produced by industry k in country i are symmetrical in a  
sense that they face same costs and demand function. The free on board prices equal  
unit costs, so pik=c(zik) where zik is a vector of input prices in industry k and country i.  
The vector of input prices consists of the prices of primary factors, wi, and the price of  
a composite intermediate good, qi. Iceberg transport costs (tijk-1) mean that the price  
of  shipping  the  industry  k‟s  product  from  country  i to  j is  c(zik)tijk.  The  value  of  
demand  for an industry k product  which  is  shipped  from  country i to  country j is  
determined  by  a  standard  Dixit-Stiglitz  maximization  exercise  which  yields  the  
following value of demand and the price index for industry k in country j: 
xi 
j k 
c zik 
ti 
j k 
1 
Ejk 
Pik 
1 
1 
1 1 
Pik 
nik 
c zik 
tik 
1 
2 
i 
where E 
jk 
is the total expenditure on the products of industry k in country j and ζ is  
the elasticity of substitution. The total value of industry k production in country i is  
given by the summation over all product varieties produced by that industry and over  
all markets j where the products are shipped: 
TVik 
nik 
c zik 
ti 
jk 
1 
Ejk 
Pik 
1 
3     
7 

========9========

We take the total value of the production as a numeraire, meaning that Σi Σk TVik = 1  
where TVik, with a slight abuse of notation, is now the share of production of industry  
k in country i. Also, we define the share of country i in total production si = Σk TVik,  
and the share of industry k in total production as sk = Σi TVik.  
As was mentioned earlier, the number of varieties is assumed to be determined  
exogenously. Specifically, they are assumed to be set in proportion to the size of an  
industry and country up to an error term ωik:  
nik = si sk exp(ωik) 
(4).  
This assumption departs from the standard monopolistically  competitive framework  
used in the new-economic-geography literature. Having monopolistically competitive  
industry would imply that the level of output of each variety is determined by the zero  
profit condition, the number of varieties is  endogenously determined by  free entry- 
exit condition, and the cross-country variation in output is due to different number of  
varieties  produced  in  each  country.  Assuming  away  monopolistically  competitive  
industries and setting the number of varieties exogenously allows the derivation of a  
linear regression equation. This does not mean, however, that the model gives up on a  
feature that is important in the geography literature -     geographical distribution of the  
demand. Indeed, even though the number of varieties is exogenously fixed, the level  
of output of each variety can vary across countries according to equation 3.  
The estimation equation is based on the double-relative measure of output of  
each industry in each country. Using equations 3 and 4, we can express that relative  
measure of output as 
sik 
TVik 
s i sk 
c zik 
1 
ti 
j k 
1 
Ejk 
Pjk 
1 exp 
i k 
5 
. 
j 
We  can  see  that  the  resulting  expression  consist 
s two  parts.  The  first  is  the  cost  
function c(z 
ik) which captures the input price variation; the second  is the summation  
8 

========10========

part which captures the demand effects and can be denoted as the market potential of  
industry k in country i: 
MP mik 
ti 
j k 
1 
Ejk 
Pjk 
1 
6 
j 
where  m 
ik 
denotes  industry  characteristics  that  interact  with  the  country‟s  
geographical  characteristics  such  as  transportation  costs  or  the spatial  pattern of  
demand. The share of output of each industry in each country is now 
sik 
c zik 
1 
MP mik exp 
i k 
7 
which means that the cross 
-country variation of industries‟ output is determined both  
by  input prices and by market potential.  
To derive a linear regression equation, equation 7 is log-linearized around a  
reference point. The reference point is c(zr) = 1 and MP(mr) =1. The idea is that there  
exists an input price vector zr such that there is  no cross-country variation in input  
costs c(zrk) for all k, and industry characteristics mr such that there is no cross-country  
variation in market potential MP(mri) for all i. The resulting equation then captures the  
variation of industry and input costs characteristics from that reference point: 
       s 
i k 
1 
zi 
c 
mk 
MP 
i k 
8 
where  Δ  denotes  a  log  deviation  from  the  reference  point,  εc is  the  vector  of  
elasticities of industry k costs with respect to input prices zi, and  εmp is the vector of  
elasticities of country i market potential with respect to industry characteristics mk.  
We  can  now  use  the  fact  that  sik are  shares  and  the  deviations  from  the  
reference  point  are  both  positive  and  negative  which  implies  that  the  summation  
condition  ΣiΣkTVikΔsik =  0  must  be  satisfied.  Using  that  equation  with  equation  8  
yields 
9 

========11========

sik 
1 
c 
TVik 
c 
zi 
MP 
TVik 
MP 
mk 
i k 
9 
i 
k 
i 
k 
We see that the terms on the right hand side are the products of industry and country  
characteristics, both expressed as deviations from the reference points. Specifically,  
the first bracket gives the product of countries‟ input prices and costs elasticities with  
respect to those input prices (which are, in fact, input shares). The second bracket is  
the product of industries‟ characteristics and elasticities of countries‟ market potential  
with respect to these characteristics. Again, εc and εmp are elasticities; Δzi and Δmk are  
log deviations from the reference point. 
We  know  that  the  input  prices  include  both  primary  products  and  an  
intermediate  good.  Midelfart-Knarvik  et  al.  show  that  it  is  possible  to  express  the  
prices  of the  primary  products  in  country  i in  terms  of  the  factor  endowments  of  
country i (Midelfart-Knarvik et al. (2000), Appendix 2).8 Specifically, they show that  
zi 
F Li 
10 
where Δ Li is the variation of the factor endowments from the reference point and F is  
the matrix of elasticities of factor prices with respect to factor endowments, evaluated  
at  the  reference  point.  As  for  the  price  of the intermediate  good  qi in  a  country i,  
Midelfart-Knarvik  et  al.  (2000)  show  that  it  can  be  directly  linked  to  a  distance  
weighted measure of proximity to production in the industry which is a measure of  
„supplier access‟ of country i. 
Expanding  equation  9,  remembering  that  Δ  is  a  log  deviation  from  the  
reference point and, for the sake of simplicity, denoting country characteristics as y, 
industry characteristics as x, and reference points for industry and country χ and γ as  
respectively, we obtain the following equation: 
                                                  
8 
The derived expression embodies the Rybczynski effect. 
10 

========12========

ln si 
k 
A 
y i 
xk 
xk 
yi 
11 
where A is a term containing the sum of products of industry and country reference  
points.  This  simplified  specification  assumes  only  one  country  and  one  industry  
characteristic.  Having j industry  and  country  characteristics,  that  equation  then  
becomes 
ln si 
,k 
A 
( y 
ji 
x 
j,k 
j 
x 
j,k 
j 
y 
j,k 
) 
12 
j 
where  
yji is  the  level  of jth country characteristic  in country i;  xjk is  the  industry k 
value  of  the  industry  characteristic  paired  with  country characteristic  j. An  
econometric application of this equation yields the following regression equation 
ln si 
k 
c 
( 
j 
y 
ji 
x 
j,k 
j 
j 
x 
j,k 
j 
j 
y 
j,k 
) 
k 
i 
13 
j 
This  gives  a  list  of  independent  variables  that  comprises  
a  constant,  country 
characteristics,  industrial  characteristics,  and  interactions  between  
country 
and  
industrial charac 
teristics. The estimated coefficients of the  
country 
characteristics, y 
j 
and industry characteristics, xj are estimates of – βjγj, and – βjχj, respectively, and so  
are expected to have negative signs. Those estimates, when divided by βj, provide the  
estimates of the industry and country reference points. The estimated coefficients of  
the interaction variables, yjxj are estimates of βj, and c is a constant term. The most  
important  estimates  from  the  point  of  view  of  what  determines  the  geographical  
concentration of industries are the interaction terms which show the importance of the  
interplay between industry and country characteristics. 
What industry and country characteristics should be considered? With regard  
to the  characteristics  related  to  the  endowment  of  primary  products,  equation  10  is  
general enough to include practically any factor-endowment characteristics. As for the  
characteristics related to the intermediate good, the model allows them to be linked to  
11 

========13========

market  potential  (the  details  are  in  Midelfart-Knarvik  et  al. (2000), section  4.2)  
yielding  an  interaction  between  the  share  of  intermediate  goods  in  production  and  
market potential which captures „forward linkages‟. However, the number of industry  
and  country  characteristics  related  to  market  potential  directly  by  equation  6  is  
limited. In particular, the model allows only two of them: transport intensity, captured  
by the term (tijk)(1-ζ) and „backward linkages‟ captured by Ejk.  
The regression equation (13) is a structural equation derived from the model.  
Its  estimation  requires  that variables  are  constructed  in  logs  and  elasticities  as 
Midelfart-Knarvik et al. (2001) did in their analysis of the location of industries across  
EU countries. The construction of the relevant variables is, however, data demanding  
and often infeasible. That might a reason why the literature also views equation 13 as  
a reduced-form regression equation relating the geographical distribution of industries  
across  countries/regions  to  industry  and  country/region  characteristics.  Various  
studies have used different state and industry interactions and  estimated variants of  
equation  13.  Midelfart-Knarvik  et  al.  (2000)  themselves  added  population  and  
manufacturing  employment  to  equation  13  instead  of  using  a  mere  constant.  In  
addition, they excluded transport intensity and include a proxy for economies of scale.  
Wolf (2007), on the other hand, included only the interaction variables and replaced 
the regional  and  industry  characteristics  with  region  and  industry  dummies.  This  
approach  is acceptable since  we  are  interested  only  in  the  interaction  terms  which  
capture  the  effect  of  industry  and  regional  characteristics  on  geographical  
concentration. Another departure from equation 13 is to use employment instead of  
gross value of production due to the unavailability of production value data (Crafts  
and  Mulatu, 2006; Wolf, 2007).  This  requires  estimation  with region-industry  
12 

========14========

dummies to control  for  the  effects  that  productivity  differences  might  have  on  the  
employment-based location quotient (Wolf, 2007).    
3. Implementation of the MK empirical framework and data set 
In this section, we describe the implementation of the MK model and the data used in  
the paper (a detailed description of the variables is in the appendix). 
Regression Equation 
In the implementation of the model, we estimate equation (13) using the method of  
Wolf (2007). We use four state characteristics (share of farm land, share of educated  
population,  coal  prices,  market  potential), six  industry  characteristics (the  share  of  
white-collar workers, steam power use, plant size, agricultural input use, intermediate  
input use, sales to industry), six interactions and add the state and industry dummies.  
The estimated equation (14) can be expressed as follows: 
ln(s 
k 
i,t 
) =  β1(FARM LAND x AGRICULTURE INPUT USE)i,t +  + β2 (EDUCATED POPULATION x WHITE COLLAR WORKERS)i,t + + β3(COAL ABUNDANCE x STEAM POWER USE)i,t + 
+ β4(MARKET POTENTIAL x INTERMEDIATE INPUT USE)i,t + + β5(MARKET POTENTIAL x SALES TO INDUSTRY)i,t +  + β6(MARKET POTENTIAL x SIZE OF ESTABLISHMENT)i,t + + β7STATEi,t + β8INDUSTRYi,t + ε 
k 
i,t 
(14) 
The first three of these interactions are predicted by theHeckscher-Ohlin (H- 
O)  theory  based  on  factor  endowments.  The  relative  magnitude  and  statistical  
significance  of β1 shows  the  importance  of farmland in  influencing  the  location  of  
industry and so on. The last three are predicted by the Krugman and Venables (1995)  
13 

========15========

model to be activated when transport costs are in the right “intermediate” range such  
that  the  pull  of  centrality  kicks  in.  The  first  market  potential  interaction  says  that  
industries  which  use  relatively  large  amounts  of  intermediate  goods  would  prefer  
locations of high market potential. Here the importance of forward linkages is the key  
but how strongly firms value centrality will depend on transport costs; cheaper inputs  
have to be traded off against a higher costs of sending goods to final consumer. The  
second market-potential interaction is based on backward linkages and presumes that  
industries which sell relatively large fraction of their output to other firms rather than  
final consumer tend to locate  relatively  close to other producers. The third market- 
potential  interaction  hypothesizes  that  industries  operating  at  relatively  large  scale 
will  value  locations  relatively  close  to  market  demand  (at  least  at  some  levels  of  
transportation costs).  The coefficients β4, β5 and β6 show the importance of market  
potential  as  a  determinant  of  industrial  location. In  the  original  work  by  Midelfart- 
Knarvik et al., the authors estimate their version of the equation (13) using OLS, and  
account for the heteroskedasticity and the country and industry fixed effects. We will  
also address additional estimation issues including endogeneity and clustered-sample  
methods. 
Data Set 
We created a unique data set of the employment shares for 48 U.S. states and  
19 two-digit level industries, six industry and four state and characteristics including  
market potential for each census year during 1880-1920.9 The data on the share 
s of  
                                                  
9 
There  are  46  states  in  1880  since  Oklahoma  did  not  exist  then,  and  North  and  South  Dakota  was  
considered  a  single  territory.  Alaska  is  excluded  throughout  the  whole  period.  More  details  of  data  
sources and methods are given in the Appendix. 
14 

========16========

two-digit  level  industrial  employment  in  the  U.S.  states  are  drawn  from  the  U.S.  
Census  of  Manufactures.  The  aggregation  of  individual  industries  at  the  two-digit  
level  follows  the  standard  industrial  classification  provided  by  Niemi  (1974).  The  
population data are from the Historical Statistics of the United States (2006). The data  
on labour force in each U.S. state are from Perloff et al. (1960), the share of farm land  
is calculated from the Historical Statistics of the United States (2006), coal prices are  
taken from various U.S. government sources, and the data on educated population by  
states  come  from  the  U.S.  occupation  censuses  and  Goldin  (1998).10 The  share  of  
white -collar  workers  as  well  as  of  steam  power  use  is  extracted  from  the  U.S.  
Censuses  of  Manufactures  1880 
-1920.  Average  plant  size  is  from  O‟Brien  (1988).  
Forward and backward linkages are evaluated using an input-output table for the U.S.  
economyin 1899 Whitney (1968).11 
Panel A in Table  
2 reports industrial characteristics obtained from the 1899  
input -output  table  which  relate  to  key  aspects  highlighted  by  locational  hypotheses  
based  either on  
market potential 
(cols. 1 and 2) or on natural advantages (Cols. 3 and  
4).  It is clear that there are big differences across industries.  For example, SIC 33,  
primary metal products, has high use of intermediates and sales to industry relative t 
o  
gross output whereas for SIC 21, tobacco products, these proportions are negligible.   
Conversely, tobacco uses agricultural inputs quite heavily but primary metal products  
does  not.    Overall,  it  is  noticeable  that  many  sectors  have  substantial  linkages  
(medians in cols.1 and 2 are both 26 per cent) whereas few sectors rely heavily on  
                                                  
10 
We thank Claudia Goldin for providing the data. 
11 
Leontief (1941) constructed an input 
-output table for 1919.  However, this is  not suitable for our  
purposes because it does not include service 
-sector activities and do 
es not distinguish between metal  
production and machinery. 
15 

========17========

inputs of primary products (medians in cols. 3 and 4 are 0.4 per cent and 1.3 per cent,  
respectively). Panel B in Table 2 shows the distribution of two-digit manufacturing  
employment between the manufacturing belt states and the states outside the belt. We  
see that industries having substantial linkages but little use of agricultural inputs are  
highly concentrated in the manufacturing belt (for example SIC 33, primary metals, or  
SIC  35&36,  machinery,)  while  industries  which  rely  on  agricultural  inputs  (for  
example SIC 28, chemicals and allied products) are less so. The differences are even  
more  profound  in  1920  when,  for  example,  SIC  24,  lumber  and  wood  products,  
employs  more  people  outside  the  manufacturing  belt  than  inside  it.  Panel  B  also  
shows that there is a slight decrease of the share of manufacturing employment in the  
manufacturing  belt  for  some  industries  between  1880  and  1920.  Those  industries  
largely produce final consumer products and since the population living outside the  
manufacturing  belt  increased  by  1920  it  is  not  surprising  that  those  industries  
increased  their  shares  outside  the  belt  too.  Despite  this,  the  overall  pattern  of  the  
industries  with  substantial  linkages  being  located  in  the  manufacturing  belt  is  
preserved, with the primary metal products, machinery, and chemical industry even  
increasing their presence in the belt.       
The  only  variable  which  needs  to  be  estimated  is  market  potential.  The  
estimation  of  market  potential  goes  back  to  Harris‟s  (1954)  seminal  paper,  which  
calculates market potential as the inverse distance-weighted sum of incomes. In recent  
years,  several  studies  have  linked  market  potential  rigorously  to  theory  (e.g.  
Krugman, 1992, Head and Mayer, 2004) with the implication that a gravity equation  
framework  should  be  used  to  estimate  market  potential.  However,  the  resulting  
methodology requires internal trade flows data which are unavailable for the U.S. for  
the period 1880-1920. Therefore we use Harris‟s original approach and calculate the  
16 

========18========

market potential of a U.S. state i using the formula Mi = ∑j φij GDPj where φij is the  
accessibility of market j for goods from the U.S. state i defined as φij = dijδ with δ = -1.  
The market j consists of nominal GDP in foreign countries, in other U.S. states, and in  
the home state i. The market accessibility of own U.S. states is calculated as 
φii = dii-δ = [2/3 . (areai/π)0.5]–δ 
(15)  
Nominal GDP of U.S. states in 1880-1910 is taken from Klein (2009) which provides  
new  estimates  of  1890  and  1910  nominal  GDP  for  each  U.S.  state  based  on  the  
methodology  developed  by  Easterlin  (1957),  and  re-estimates  Easterlin‟s  original  
1880 and 1900 estimates.12 Data for 1920 are from Easterlin (1957). The source 
s of  
nominal  GDP  
for foreign  countries  and  the  corresponding  exchange  rate  are  in  the  
Appendix. The area of U.S. states is taken from the Historical Statistics of the United  
States  (2006),  the  distance  between  the  U.S.  states  and  the  foreign  countries  is  t 
he  
kilometer distance between the corresponding capitals, and the distance between the  
U.S. states is calculated as the kilometer distance between their capital cities.   
                                                  
12 
Easterlin‟s (1957) study provides estimates of nominal GDP from the income side for each U.S. state  
in 1880, 1900, 1919-1921, and 1949-1951. Estimation involves two steps. First, the ratio of thestate  
total personal income per capita relative to the U.S. total personal income per capita for each U.S. state  
is  constructed  from  the  census  publications.  These  ratios  are  then  used  to  allocate  the  U.S.  total  
personal income per capita among the states. The calculation of the ratios involves the calculation and  
the  weighting  of  the  sectoral  ratios  for  agriculture  and  six  non-agriculture  sectors.  Total  personal  
income includes wages, salaries, and proprietor‟s income in agriculture and six non-agriculture sectors;  
property income includes rental income, personal interest income, and dividends, in agriculture and six  
non-agriculture industries. The non-agriculture sectors consist of manufacturing, mining, construction,  
transportation and communication and public utilities, private households including domestic service  
performed in private households, and “all other” which includes finance, trade, government, and other  
services than domestic services.  The re-estimated 1880 and 1900 figures in Klein (2009) are very close  
to Easterlin‟s original estimates.     
17 

========19========

Although there are no US internal trade flows data for the period 1880-1920,  
we can justify the assumption of δ = -1 in two ways. First, our estimates of market  
potential are for the railroad era and we believe that by this time physical distances  
are a reasonable approximation to economic distances inside the United States. Our  
choice of -1 for δ is consistent with estimates for modern internal U.S. trade (Wolf,  
2000;  Hillberry  and  Hummels,  2003,  Knaap,  2006).  Second,  we  can  analyze  US  
internal railroad commodity trade in 1949. This is the earliest date for which internal  
trade data exist and it is suitable for our purposes because the manufacturing belt was  
still intact at that time, and the railroads were still the most important transportation  
mode.13 The data come from the Interstate Commerce Commission Carload Waybill  
Statistics which r 
eport commodity flows between the US states at 3 
-digit level. We  
estimate the following gravity regression:  
ln X 
ij 
= EXi + IMj + δ lndij + βj Bij + εij 
(16), 
where Xij is the aggregate value of the state‟s i export to country j, EXi and IMj are  
exporter and importer fixed effects, Bij is a dummy variable which is one if i and j,  
share a border. We estimate this equation using Poisson pseudo-maximum-likelihood  
estimator,  following  the  suggestion  of  Santos  Silva  and  Tenreyro  (2006).  The  
estimated  coefficient  of  δ  is  statistically  significant  at  1%  with  the  magnitude  of - 
1.03187 and a standard error of 0.04906, justifying the use of δ = -1 in the calculation  
of the market potential.  
Table 3 displays our estimates of market potential by state for 1880 and 1920.   
Two points stand out.  First, the rank order of market potential is very stable during  
this period.  Second, the „manufacturing-belt‟ states tend to have the highest levels of  
market potential in both years.  It should be noted that states with similar GDP inside  
                                                  
13 
In 1949, the interstate highway network was still in the future.    
18 

========20========

and  outside  the  manufacturing  belt  generally  have  quite  different  levels  of  market  
potential; for example, Rhode Island and Washington have very similar GDP but, as  
Table 3 shows, market potential of the former was about 5 times that of the latter. 
4. Empirical Results 
Estimation Issues 
In our initial estimations of equation (14) market potential is calculated assuming δ =  
-1, and forward and backward linkages are based on the 1899 input-output table in  
Whitney (1968); then other variants are presented by way of sensitivity analysis. This  
section  discusses  the  statistical  properties  of  the  results  while  their  historical 
interpretation is left to the following section. Estimation of equation (13) raises the  
following issues: heteroskedasticity, endogeneity  of some of the regressors, and the  
use of panel data techniques. Our data, as seen from the specification of the regression  
equation, have three dimensions: industry k, state i, and time t. Leaving aside the time  
dimension  for  a  moment,  state  and  industry  dimensions  are  potential  sources  of  
heteroskedasticity. Furthermore, having 19 industries in each U.S. state suggests that  
we might face an unobserved cluster effect coming from the U.S. states. In this case,  
cluster-robust standard errors should be used (White, 1984, Arellano, 1987); failure to  
do so could have  a dramatic effect on t-statistics (Pepper, 2002) which would then  
invalidate  our  statistical  inference.  Indeed,  cluster-robust  standard  errors  place  no  
restriction on heteroskedasticity and correlation within clusters.    
The  issue  of  endogeneity  arises  for  two  reasons.  First,  there  is  a  direct  
implication  of  the  unobserved  cluster  effect  discussed  in  the  previous  paragraph.  
Using cluster-robust standard errors assumes that the unobserved cluster effect is not  
correlated  with  the  regressors.  However,  if  this  assumption  were  invalid,  then  the  
19 

========21========

estimators would be inconsistent. In this case, a “within” estimator that would sweep  
away  the  unobserved  within-cluster  effect  is  attractive  (Cameron  et  al.,  2005,  
Wooldridge,  2003,  2006).  Second,  market  potential  and  hence  its corresponding  
interactions  may  be  endogenous.  This calls  for  instrumental  variable  estimation.  In  
our  setting,  we  have  to  rely  on  an  exogenous  geographical  determinant  such  as  
distance  to  an  eastern  seaport,  as  used  in  several  recent  studies  (e.g.  Redding  and  
Venables 2004, Head and Mayer 2006, Knaap 2006). Specifically, the instrument is  
the distance to New York City.14 
Econometrics  research  in  recent  years  has  shown  that  instrumental  variable  
estimation has its pitfalls. Although it provides consistent estimates, it is much less  
efficient than the OLS est 
imator (Wooldridge, 2002, Cameron et al., 2005). This is  
exacerbated when the correlation between instruments and instrumented variables is  
weak, leaving us with IV estimation of low precision (Staiger et al. 1997; Kleibergen,  
2002; Hahn et al., 2003). Ano 
ther profound implication of weak instruments is that  
even mild instrument endogeneity can lead to IV being even more inconsistent than  
OLS (Bound et al., 1995).  To account for this, we perform weak instrument tests to  
justify the appropriateness of using 
instrumental variables estimation. In addition, we  
follow the suggestion of Wooldridge (2002, p. 104) and perform endogeneity tests on  
the suspect regressors.    
Returning 
to  the  time  dimension,  its  presence  naturally  calls  for  the  use  of  
panel data techn 
iques. However, panel data estimation is done on pooled data, which  
assumes the same parameters over time and across regions. In our case, pooling the  
data across time might not be that innocent. Indeed, the period 1880 
-1920 is known  
                                                  
14 
We  have  also  used  lagged  variables  as  the  instruments  and  the  results  of  the  regression  analysis  
conducted below were confirmed. These additional results are available from the authors upon request.    
20 

========22========

for  dramatic  changes  in  the  U.S  economy,  which  suggests  a  cautious  approach  to  
pooling the data across time. Consequently, a testing of poolability is carried out to  
see whether panel data techniques should be used or not (Baltagi, 2005).  
As was mentioned in the section on the MK model, the equation (13) can be  
estimated  either  with  all  industry  and  state  controls  or  with  the  state  and  industry  
dummies, as in Wolf (2007). All of the regressions discussed in the next section were  
estimated  both  ways  and  the  differences  in  the  magnitude  and  the  statistical  
significance of the six interaction variables, which are the main variables of interest,  
are  miniscule.  We  present  the  results  using  Wolf‟s  (2007)  specification;  the  results  
with  the  full  set  of  industry  and  state  controls  are  available  from  the  authors  upon  
request. 
The Basic Results 
The  results  of  the  initial  estimation  of  equation  (14)  are  in  Tables  4-6.  Table  4 
presents the results for the pooled sample 1880-1920. Column I shows the results of  
estimation with cluster-robust standard errors since the data are clustered at the state  
level and heteroskedasticity is present, as confirmed by the Breusch-Pagan test (which  
rejects the hypothesis of homoskedastic standard errors at the 1% significance level).  
The  estimation  results show  that  out  of  three  H-O  interaction  variables,  only  
agriculture is statistically significant (at 1%), and has a correct sign; the other two are  
insignificant.  As  for  the  market  potential interactions,  two  of  them  are  highly  
statistically significant and with the correct sign – backward linkages and plant size – 
while  the  forward  linkages  interaction  variable  is  insignificant,  though  with  the  
correct sign.   
21 

========23========

The  time  dimension  potentially  allows  us  to  use  panel-data  estimation.  
Because of heteroskedasticity, a robust Hausman test (Cameron et al., 2005, p. 718)  
was used to test between fixed- and random-effects models and the test statistics (see  
Table 3) favor the fixed-effects model. Column II  presents the results of the fixed- 
effects estimation with panel-robust standard errors. The results confirm the previous  
findings and provide support for the pooled OLS estimates.     
As was argued earlier, pooling data across time might pose a problem. Bearing  
in mind that the U.S. economy was undergoing dramatic changes in 1880-1920, the  
assumption  of  the  same  parameters  across  time  could  be  too  strong.  Indeed,  the  
forward linkages in Table 4 are not statistically significant despite the fact that many  
industries have substantial linkages, as discussed in the previous section. Therefore,  
we carried out a Chow test to determine whether the data should be pooled or not. The  
calculated  F-statistic F(23,  4465)  is  27.2265  which  enables  us  to  reject  the  null  
hypothesis  that  β[j]t=  β[j]  
t at  the  1%  significance  level.  Accordingly,  we  run  
separate regressions for 1880, 1890, 1900, 1910, and 1920.  
For  each  of  those  years,  we  have  estimated  equation  (14)  with  OLS  using  
cluster-robust standard errors and cluster-specific fixed effects. The reason for using  
cluster-robust  standard  errors  is,  as  with  the  earlier  regressions,  the  possibility  that  
there  is  an  unobserved  cluster  effect  which  needs  to  be  taken  into  account.  The  
cluster-robust standard errors estimator assumes, however, that the unobserved cluster  
effect is not correlated with the regressors and puts it into the composite error term εik.  
If the unobserved cluster effect actually happens to be correlated with the regressors,  
the OLS estimator becomes inconsistent. Therefore, we have also estimated a cluster- 
22 

========24========

specific fixed effect, to allow for the possibility of that correlation.15 The results are  
presented in Table  
5. 
A  general  overview  of  the  estim 
interaction variables  
matter 
in each of the years, th 
ation  results  suggests  that  
market  potential 
ough some variation exists before  
1900. The H 
-O interactions are less prevalent except for agriculture until 19 
market  potential  interactions 
,  the  plant 
significant, usually at the 1% significance level. T 
almost  always  significant,  except  for  
1890  and  
10. Of the  
-size  interaction  is  always  statistically  
he ba ckward -linkages interaction is  
1910.  Forward  linkages  are  first  
significant  in  1890 
, after  that,  they  remain  significant  until  1920.  The  H 
interactions are very different in terms of significance.  
change s signs  and  
is insignificant  for  most  of  the  time.  
significant with a correct sign in 1890 only. 
hand, is highly statistically significant  
between 1890 and 
it  is insignificant 
though with the correct sign 
-O  
The s killed -labor interaction  
The  c oal  interaction  is  
16 
The agriculture interaction, on the other  
19 10 , before 
and after which  
.17 
The  endogeneity  issue  regarding  market  potential  and  its  interactions  is  
addressed by instrumental 
-variable estimation. As was noted earlier, the instrument is  
the  distance  to  
an  eastern  seaport  
– the  New  York  City.  Instrumental-variable  
                                                  
15 
Even in the case of cluster-specific fixed effect estimation,we use cluster-robust standard errors to  
estimate a fully robust variance-matrix, as shown in Wooldridge (2003, 2006). We have also estimated  
the  cluster-specific  random  effect  model,  and  the  results  remain  qualitatively  unchanged;  they  are  
available from the authors upon request.   
16 
The availability of coal in a U.S. state is captured by the coal prices. This implies that th 
e correct  
sign  of  the  coal  interaction  is  negative  
– a low  price  of  coal  makes  a  U.S.  state  attractive  for  the  
manufacturing firms.  
17 
An  F -test  for  joint  significance  of  the  H 
-O  interactions  shows  that  the  null  hypothesis  cannot  be  
rejected for 1910 and 1 
920. 
23 

========25========

estimation does not perform well in the presence of weak instruments. Therefore, we  
check whether our instruments are „weak‟ or not using Shea‟s (1997) partial R2 and  
the weak instrument test as suggested by Stock and Yogo (2005). In additional, we  
perform  an  endogeneity  C-test  (Hayashi,  2000,  pp  233-234).  Instrumental  variable  
estimation  is  carried  out  using IV/2SLS  as  well  as 2-step  GMM,  which  is  more  
efficient  than  IV/2SLS. The  differences  in  the  magnitude  and  the  statistical  
significance of the estimated coefficients are very small. Table 5 presents the results  
of  IV/2SLS  estimation;  the  results  of  2-step  GMM are available  from  the  authors  
upon request.  
For  each  year,  we  again  estimate  equation  (14),  and  we  use  cluster-robust  
standard  errors.  First,  we  check  the  correlation  between  our  instruments  and  
instrumented market potential and the corresponding interactions. Shea‟s partial R2 in  
Table 6 show a very strong correlation between the instruments and the instrumented  
variables,  ranging from  0.74 to 0.78. We have also carried out a formal test of the  
weak  instrument,  as suggested  by  Stock  and  Yogo  (2005).  The  relevant  F-statistics  
largely exceed the critical values reported by Stock and Yogo (2005) --the F-statistics  
range from around 47 in 1880 to around 56 in 1920. Finally, the endogeneity test in 
Table 6 rejects the null hypothesis that the market potential and its interactions are  
exogenous. 
              The results in Table 6 show that overall the picture that emerges from Table  
5 is preserved. The market potential interaction variables are generally significant and  
have  the  correct  sign.  The  plant-size  interaction  is  statistically  significant except  in  
1920 and  usually  at  the 5%  significance  level,  slightly  lower  than  in  Table 5.  The  
forward-linkage  interaction  is  significant  from  1890,  and  the  significance  rises  by  
24 

========26========

1920. The significance of the estimated backward-linkages coefficients remains high  
throughout the period, except for 1890. 
Robustness, Standardized Coefficients and the Economic Significance of the Results 
We have also performed additional robustness checks.18 First,  as an alternative way to  
address  endogeneity,  we  also  re 
-estimated  equation  ( 
14 )  with  a  revised  market 
- 
potentia 
l  variable  which  was  calculated  summing  distance 
-deflated  GDP  as  usual  
except for omitting own GDP.  The results that were obtained (available on request)  
are  again  very  similar.  The  market  potential 
-interactions  are  generally  significant  
while  over  time  t 
he  linkage  interactions  become  stronger;  the  agriculture  factor 
- 
endowment interaction is significant initially but not after 1900. 
W e  have 
also 
checked  the  robustness  of  the  H 
-O  interaction  variables.  
Specifically, we have used the share of  
agricultural la 
bor force 
(similarly to  
Crafts 
and  
Mulatu , 200 6) instead of the share of  
farm land 
in the agricultural 
-interaction variable,  
and the share of coal inputs in gross product instead of the ratio of horse power to  
gross output in the coal 
-interaction variable. 
19 
In both cases, the qualitative results are  
similar to the results in Tables  
4-6, with agriculture being the most prevalent among  
all  H -O interaction variables. 
20 
                                                  18 
Results are available from authors on request. 
19 
The share of  
agricultural employment in each U.S. state  
is calculated 
from Perloff et al. (1960) 
; the  
share of coal in gross product comes from Whitney (1968) and Leontief (1941). 
20 
The  share  of  agric 
ultural  labor  force  is  potentially  endogenous  too.  Therefore,  we  have  also  
considered agricultural labor force as endogenous and instrumented it with its lagged values. The sign  
and the statistical significance are the same as when they are treated as exog 
enous.        
25 

========27========

Overall, these results show the statistical importance of all the market potential 
and  some of  the  H-O  forces,  consistently  throughout  the  whole  period  1880-1920  
irrespective  of  the  estimation  technique.  This  suggests that  industrial  location  was  
indeed driven by both the agglomeration mechanisms related to market potential as  
well as natural advantages, though the former seems to prevail.  We can support this  
inference  by  calculating standardized  or  so-called beta  coefficients of  all the 
interaction  variables.  The  beta  coefficients  provide  a comparison  of the  relative  
importance of the interaction variables in determining state shares of manufacturing  
employment by industry.  The results reported in Table 7 show that throughout 1880  
to 1920 the sum of the contributions of the market-potential interactions exceeds that  
of the H-O interactions and this is increasingly the case over time. Among the market  
potential interactions,  scale  economies  always  have  a  substantial  impact  but  it  is  
noticeable that forward linkages become more important over time and that, by 1920,  
the contribution of linkages outweighs everything else. 
To  evaluate  the  economic  significance  of  the  market  potential  interaction  
variables  and  the  interaction  variables  capturing  the  states‟  natural  advantages,  we  
follow Redding and Venables (2004) and examine their effect on the predicted share  
of  manufacturing  employment  using  counterfactual  analysis. We  use  the  estimated  
coefficients  in  our  preferred  specification  (Table  5,  Equation  FE) to  examine  the  
impact  of  the  changes  in  the  geographical  location  of  a  U.S.  state  as  well  as  the  
changes  of  the  U.S. state‟s  natural  advantages. Specifically,  the  change  of  the  U.S.  
state‟s  geographical  location  is  captured  by  the  change  of  its  market  potential;  the  
change of the natural advantages is captured by the changes in the share of the farm  
land and coal prices respectively. All of these changes are investigated in 1890 since  
it  is  the  only  year  in  which  the coal  price  interaction  has  the  correct  sign  and  is  
26 

========28========

statistically significant, allowing us to compare the agricultural interaction, the coal 
price interaction and the market potential interactions. 
To quantify the importance of the proximity to  large markets, we undertake  
two hypothetical experiments: first, we  increase  the  market  potential  of  four  states  
which  have  very  low  market  potential  by  50%; second, we  decrease  the  market  
potential of four states which have very high market potential by 50%. We see from  
Table 8, columns 1 and 2 that an increase of the market potential by 50% generates an 
increase of  the  state‟s  share  of  the  manufacturing  employment  in total  U.S.  
manufacturing  employment  that  ranges  from  34 to  55 percent,  and  that a 50%  
decrease  generates  a  decrease  ranging  from  41 to  45 percent. This  means  that,  for  
example, lowering the  market  potential  of  the  state  of  New  York  by  50%, which  
causes 44.8 percent drop in the New York‟s share of manufacturing employment in 
total U.S. manufacturing employment, decreases that share from 16.3% to 8.9%.  
Similarly, we examine the effect of the change in coal prices and the share of  
farm  land  on  the  share  of  the  state‟s  manufacturing  employment  in total  U.S.  
manufacturing employment by considering 50% increases or decreases. The results in  
Table 8, columns 3-6 show that the effects are smaller in comparison with the effects  
of market potential. For example, an increase of the share of farm land by 50% causes  
an  increase  of the  state‟s share  of manufacturing  employment  on  the  total  U.S.  
manufacturing employment by between 0.04 and 0.16 per cent, and a decrease of coal  
prices  by  50%  results  in a 0.14  to  0.37  percent  increase  in that  share.  As  in  the  
previous example, let us consider the state of New York. An increase in the price of  
coal  by  50%,  which  lowers  the  state‟s  share  of  manufacturing  employment in total  
U.S. manufacturing employment by 0.11 percent, decreases that share from 16.3% to  
16.2%.   
27 

========29========

In  addition  to  these  counterfactuals,  we  consider  one  more  hypothetical  
experiment with the geographical characteristics of the U.S. states. Specifically, we  
relocate a land-locked U.S. state to the east coast. The relocation is done by changing  
the state‟s market potential. As was outlined in the section on the data set, the market 
potential of a U.S. state comprises the market potential of foreign  countries, of the  
surrounding U.S.  states,  and that  of itself. For  example,  relocating  Nebraska  to the  
east coast means that Nebraska will have higher market potential because it is now  
closer  to  foreign  countries  and  is  in  close  proximity  to  New  England  and  Middle- 
Atlantic states with very high GDP.21 The cal 
culations  
for the 
relocati 
on of 
Nebraska  
in  1890  show  
that  
being  on  the 
east  coast  increases  Nebraska‟s  share  of  
manufacturing employment in total U.S. employment by 29 percent, which means that  
it increases from 1.1% to 1.42%. 
Since the overall counterfactual change of market potential comes from three  
market potential interactions – forward linkages, backward linkages, and plant size – 
we can split the effect of that counterfactual change among those interactions to see  
their  relative  contribution  to  the resulting  change  in  the  share  of  a  state‟s  
manufacturing  employment  on  the  U.S.  total  manufacturing  employment.  Table  9 
presents the contribution of each of the market potential interactions to the change of  
the share of manufacturing employment in total U.S. manufacturing employment in  
the state of New York and California in 1890, respectively. 
             Let  us  consider  the  state  of  New  York  again.  We  see  in  column  1  that  the  
share  of  New  York‟s  manufacturing  employment  in U.S.  total  manufacturing  
employment in 1890 is 16.27%. A counterfactual 50% decline of New York‟s market  
                                                  
21 
The  counterfactual  is  what  if  Nebraska  moved  to  Maryland  (a  state  with  very  similar  GDP  per  
capita).  
28 

========30========

potential would result in a 44.8% decrease of that share, as we have seen in Table 8, 
column 2. This means that the state of New York loses 7.29 percentage points of that  
share and the resulting share is 8.98%. Columns 2 and 3 present the contribution of  
the market potential interactions to the percentage change, and to the loss or gain of  
the manufacturing shares. We see from column 2 that, for example, forward linkages  
decrease  the  manufacturing  share  by  24.61%  out  of  the  total  44.60%.  Column  3 
translates  these  percentage  changes  into  the  actual  shares  of  manufacturing  
employment  relative  to  the  U.S.  manufacturing  employment.  Following  upon  the  
previous  example,  column  3  tells  us  that  out  of  7.29 percentage  points  of  
manufacturing  employment  that  are  lost  because  of  the  counterfactual  decrease  of  
market potential, 4 percentage points are due to forward linkages. 
               In accounting for changes in a state‟s share of manufacturing employment as  
market potential changes, Table 9 reveals that forward linkages have about 2.7 times  
the impact of plant size which, in turn, has about 2.3 times the impact of backward  
linkages. 
5. Discussion of the Results 
The  model  that  we  have  used  for  our  empirical  work  maintains  that  the  shares  of  
manufacturing employment in each industry across states depend on input prices and  
the  spatial  distribution  of  demand.22    Inputs  include  both  primary  factors  and  a  
composite  intermediate  good,  the  prices  of  
which  reflect  factor  endowments  and  
proximity to suppliers, respectively.  The model embodies the Rybczynski effect that  
an  increase  in  the  endowment  of  a  f actor  raises  output  in  the  industries  that  use  it  
                                                  
22 
As explained in section 2 above, input prices do not appear in the estimating equation but, using a  
„dual‟ formulation, are represented by factor endowments and market potential  
29 

========31========

intensively but also allows proximity to suppliers of intermediates to raise output of  
industries that use intermediates intensively.  The spatial distribution of demand has  
its effect through the attraction of market access that is driven by the geography of  
GDP and by transport costs. 
Our  results  suggest  that  input  prices  and  the  spatial  pattern  of  demand  did  
indeed matter for industrial location at the turn of the twentieth century.  The inputs  
that  matter  include  intermediates  and  we  find  that  forward-linkage  effects  were  
important.  While  factor  endowments  and  market  potential  both  influence  industrial  
location, the latter was more important and its impact was felt both through linkage  
effects and the attraction of market access for sectors where plant size was relatively  
large. 
The overall pattern of our results is consistent with the traditional accounts of  
industrial  location  reviewed  in  the  introduction.    They  would  not  come  as  a  great  
surprise  to  the  authors  of  the  report  in  National  Resources  Committee  (1939)  who  
estimated  that,  in  1935,  743 thousand manufacturing  jobs  were  resource  oriented  
compared with 887 thousand that were tied to local consumers and 6881 thousand that  
were „footloose‟.  The strong showing of linkage effects matches the account given by  
Perloff et al. (1960).   
On the other hand, the  picture that  we paint differs quite considerably from  
that  sketched  by  Kim  (1999).    We  believe  that  Kim‟s  failure  to  take  account  of  
linkage  effects  is  an  important  omission  and  has  led  him  to  exaggerate  the  role  of  
factor  endowments.    Our  model  takes  account  of,  and  finds  some  evidence  for,  
30 

========32========

Rybcynski  effects  but  makes  Kim‟s  claim  that  these  are  virtually  the  whole  story  
seem implausible.23 
It  should  also  be  noted  that  our  emphasis  on  linkage  effects  also  implies  a  
different  explanation  for  the  persis 
tence  of  the  manufacturing  belt  from  the  one  
popularized  by  Krugman  (1991a) 
(1991b). 
   His  account  stressed  the  interaction  
between market potential and plant size in the context of transport costs reduced by  
the railroad together with many footloose produc 
ers.  Our results suggest that this is  
not the main reason why the manufacturing belt persisted although it could perhaps  
play a key role in its establishment in the mid nineteenth century. 
24 
Finally, it is important to note two caveats to our findings.   
First, our argument  
applies to the persistence of the manufacturing belt, which we believe was cemented  
by  linkage  effects,  not  its  emergence.    We  do  not  have  the  data  to  test  hypotheses  
about the latter.  It may well be that in some cases the origins of a 
n industrial cluster  
can be found in the direct or indirect effects of natural resources.  In fact a case in  
point  is  automobiles.  
At  the  turn  of  the  twentieth  century,  Detroit  was  already  a  
leading  city  in  making  small  stationary  gasoline  engines,  marine  
gasoline  engines,  
wagons,  and  carriages.  This  was  largely  due  to  hardwood  forests  that  provided  an  
                                                  
23 
We allow for an additional factor endowment, human capital, which was not considered by Kim  
(1999) but this does not have a significant effect.  The work of Goldin and Katz (1998) suggests this is  
not surprisingin our period. 
24 
Krugman (1991b) proposed a simple model in which manufacturing concentrates in one region out  
of two when F > tx(1  
– π)/2 where F is fixed costs, t is transport cost, x is sales, and π is the share of  
footloose  workers.   A similar line  ofreasoning  is  used by Meyer (1983) (1989) to explain  why  the  
Midwest  but  not  the  South  joined  the  manufacturing  belt.  Clearly,  plant  sizes  did  increase  (Atack,  
1985), transport costs fell (Carter et al., 2006, p. 781) and footloose  manufacturing grew in relative  
importance (Perloff et al., 1960). 
31 

========33========

excellent  material  for  the  production  of  wagons  and  carriages  and  the  presence  of  
lakes  which  stimulated  the  production  of  gasoline  engines  that  were  used  to power  
boats.  Having  a  large  market  for  gasoline  engines,  wagons,  and  carriages  allowed  
Detroit to offer good supplier access to the automobile components such as bodies,  
wheels  and  internal-combustion  engines and Detroit  emerged  as  industry‟s  leading  
part supplier. As a result, the car producers found the region very attractive and by the  
1920s, Detroit became a leading producer of cars.25 
Second,  it  must  be  recognized  that  we  have  not  estimated  a  fully 
-fledged  
NEG  model  of  industrial  location.    We  do  no 
t  incorporate  either  monopolistic  
competition  or  non 
-monotonic  relationships  between  transport  costs  and  spatial  
concentration.  So we have certainly not done full justice to the informal ideas in the  
traditional literature nor the formal treatments of wri 
ters like Krugman and Venables  
(1995).  The prominence of linkage effects would surely be expected by these writers  
but, strictly speaking, we have not investigated their hypotheses.  
6. Conclusion 
In  this  paper  we  have  implemented  a  version  of  a  model  originally  developed  by  
Midelfart-Knarvik  et  al.  (2000)  to  investigate  the  importance  of  market  access  and  
factor endowments in industrial location decisions in order to discover the reasons for  
the persistence of the manufacturing belt in the United States at the turn of the 20th 
century.  This allows us to give answers to the questions that we posed at the outset. 
As far as factor endowments are concerned, we find that the share of farmland  
in a state is the most important variable and had significant effects around the turn of  
                                                  
25 
A detailed analysis of the rise of the Midwest as the centre of the automobile industry is provided in  
Tsai (1999). 
32 

========34========

the twentieth century.  Generally speaking, other factor endowments are insignificant. 
We  find  that  market  potential  had  a  substantial  impact  on the  location  of  
manufacturing in the United States throughout the period 1880 to 1920, that it was  
much  more  important  than  factor  endowments,  and  that  the  influence  of  market  
potential worked both through linkage effects and scale effects, especially the former.    
Our  results  suggest  that  market  access and  linkage  effects were the  central  
considerations that  locked  in  the  manufacturing  belt  and  accounted for  the  path  
dependence in the location of American manufacturing in the late 19th and early 20th 
centuries. 
33 

========35========

References 
Arellano, M., “Computing Robust Standard Errors for Within-Group Estimators,”  
Oxford  Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 49 (1987), 431-434. 
Atack, J., “Industrial Structure and the Emergence of the Modern Industrial  
Corporation”, Explorations in Economic History 22 (1985), 29-52. 
Baltagi, B.H., Econometric Analysis of Panel Data, 3rd Edition (Chichester: John  
Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2005) 
Bound, J., D. A. Jaeger, and R. M. Baker, “Problems with Instrumental Variable  
Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous  
Explanatory Variables is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical  
Association 90 (1995), 443-450.  
Cameron, A.C., and P.K. Trivedi, Microeconometrics: Methods and Application  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005). 
Carter, S., Gartner, S., Haines, M., Olmstead, A., Sutch, R., and Wright, G.,  
Historical Statistics of the United States, vol. 4 (Cambridge: Cambridge  
University Press, 2006). 
Combes, P-P., T. Mayer, and J-F. Thisee, Economic Geography. The Integration of  
Regions and Nations (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008). 
Crafts, N., and A. Mulatu, “How Did the Location of Industry Respond to Falling  
Transport Costs in Britain Before World War I,” Journal of Economic History 
66 (2006), 575-607. 
Davis R.D., and D.E Weinstein, “Economic Geography and Regional Production  
Structure: An Empirical Investigation,” European Economic Review 43  
(1999), 379-407. 
34 

========36========

Davis R.D., and D.E. Weinstein, “Market Access, Economic Geography and  
Comparative Advantage: An Empirical Test,” Journal of International  
Economics 59 (2003), 1-23. 
Easterlin,  R.A.,  “State  Income  Estimates”,  in:  Population  Redistribution  and  
Economic  Growth  United  States,  1870-1950,  Volume  I:  Methodological  
Considerations and Reference Tables, by Everett S. Lee Ann Rather Miller,  
Carol  P.  Brainerd,  Richard  A.  Easterlin,  (Philadelphia:  The  American  
Philosophical Society, 1957). 
Estadísticas Históricas de México, (Instituto Nacional de Estadística, 1990). 
Flandreau, M., and F. Zumer, The Making of Global Finance, 1880-1913 (Paris:  
OECD, 2004). 
Goldin, C., “America‟s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread of  
Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century”, The Journal of Economic  
History 58 (1998), 345-374. 
Goldin, C. and Katz, L. F., “The Origins of Technology-Skill Complementarity”,  
Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (1998), 693-732. 
Green, A.G., Regional Aspects of Canada’s Economic Growth (Toronto and Buffalo:  
University of Toronto Press , 1971). 
Hahn, J., and J. Hausman, ” Weak Instruments: Diagnosis and Cures in Empirical  
Econometrics,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 93  
(2003), 118-125. 
Harris, C., “The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the United  
States,” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 64 (1954), 315- 
348. 
Hayashi, F., Econometrics, (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2000). 
35 

========37========

Head, K., and T. Mayer, “Regional Wage and Employment Responses to Market  
Potential in the EU,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 36 (2006), 573- 
594.  
Head, K., and T. Mayer, “Market Potential and the Location of Japanese Investment  
in the European Union,” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (2004), 959- 
972. 
Hillberry, R. and Hummels, D., “Intranational Home Bias: Some Explanations”,  
Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2003), 1089-1092. 
Kim, S., “Expansion of Markets and the Geographic Distribution of Economic  
Activities: Trends in U. S. Regional Manufacturing Structure, 1860-1987”,  
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1995), 881-908. 
Kim, S., “Regions, Resources, and Economic Geography: Sources of U.S. Regional  
Comparative Advantage, 1880-1987”, Regional Science and Urban  
Economics 29 (1999), 1-32. 
Klein, A., “State Personal Income Estimates, United States 1880-1910,” Warwick  
Economic Research Paper No. 916, 2009. 
Knaap, T., “Trade, Location, and Wages in the United States,” Regional Science and  
Urban Economics 36 (2006), 595-612.  
Krugman, P., Geography and Trade (Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 1991a).  
Krugman, P., “History and Industry Location: The Case of the Manufacturing Belt,”  
American Economic Review Papers & Proceedings 81 (1991b), 80-83.  
Krugman, P., “A Dynamic Spatial Model,” National Bureau of Economic Research  
Working Paper No. 4219 (1992). 
Krugman, P., and A. Venables, “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”  
Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (1995), 857-880. 
36 

========38========

Leontief, W.W., The Structure of the American Economy, 1919-1939 (New York:  
Oxford University Press, 1941). 
Maddison, A., “World Population, GDP and Per Capita GDP, 1-2003 AD”,  
Groningen Growth and Development Centre, 2004. URL:  
http://www.ggdc.net/Maddison/ 
Meyer, D. R., “Emergence of the American Manufacturing Belt: an Interpretation”,  
Journal of Historical Geography 9 (1983), 145-174. 
Meyer, D. R., “Midwestern Industrialization and the American Manufacturing Belt in  
the Nineteenth Century”, Journal of Economic History 49 (1989), 921-937. 
Midelfart-Knarvik, K.H., H.G. Overman, S. Redding, and A.J. Venables, “The  
Location of European Industry,” report prepared for the Directorate Generate  
for Economic and Financial Affairs, European Commission, Economic Papers  
No. 142, (Brussels: European Commission, April 2000). 
Midelfart-Knarvik, K.H., H.G. Overman, and A.J. Venables, “Comparative  
Advantage and Economic Geography: Estimating the Determinants of  
Industrial Location in the EU,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2618 (2000). 
Midelfart-Knarvik, K.H., H.G. Overman, “Delocation and European Integration. Is  
Structural Spending Justified?” Economic Policy (2002), 323-359. 
Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics, Europe 1750-2000, Fifth Edition 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003). 
Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics, Americas 1750-2000, Fifth Edition 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003). 
Niemi, A.W., State and Regional Patterns in American Manufacturing 1860-1900 
(London: Greenwood Press, 1974).  
37 

========39========

O'Brien, A.P., ”Factory Size, Economies of Scale, and Great Merger Wave of 1898- 
1902,” The Journal of Economic History 48 (1988), 639-649.  
Officer, L.H., Dollar-Pound Exchange Rate From 1791, MeasuringWorth, 2008.  
URL: http://www.measuringworth.org/exchangepound/ 
Pepper, J.P., “Robust Inferences from Random Clustered Samples: An Application  
Using Data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” Economic Letters 75  
(2002), 341-345. 
Perloff, H.S., E.S. Dunn, E.E. Lampard, and R.F. Muth, Regions, Resources, and  
Economic Growth (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1960).  
Redding, S., and A. Venables, “Economic Geography and International Inequality,” 
Journal of International Economics 62:1 (2004), 53-82. 
Santos Silva, J.M.C, and S. Tenreyro, “The Log of Gravity,” The Review of  
Economics and Statistics 88 (2006), 641-658.  
Shea, J., ”Instrument Relevance in Multivariate Linear Models: A Simple Measure,”  
Review of Economics and Statistics 79 (1997), 348-352. 
Staiger, D., and J. Stock, “Instrumental Variable Regression with Weak Instruments,” 
Econometrica 65 (1997), 557-586. 
Stock, J.H., and M. Yogo, “Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression”,  
in Andrews, D.W.K., and J. H. Stock, Identification and Inference for  
Econometrics Models. Essays in Honor of Thomas Rothenberg (Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press, 2005). 
Tsai, L. B.-G., The Spatial Aggregation of Automobile Manufacturing Activities in the  
American Midwest, PhD Dissertation (Berkeley, CA: University of California,  
Berkeley, 1999). 
38 

========40========

Thomas, M., An Input-Output Approach to the British Economy, 1890-1914, D. Phil.  
Thesis (University of Oxford, 1984). 
Ullman, E. L., American Commodity Flow (Seattle: University of Washington Press,  
1957) 
White, H., “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a  
Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity,” Econometrica 48 (1980), 817-838. 
White, H., Asymptotic Theory for Econometricians (San Diego: Academic Press,  
1984). 
Whitney, W.G., The Structure of the American Economy in the Late Nineteenth  
Century, PhD Dissertation (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University, 1968). 
Wolf, H. C., “Intranational Home Bias in Trade”, Review of Economics and Statistics 
82 (2000), 555-563. 
Wolf, N., “Endowments vs. Market Potential: What Explains the Relocation of  
Industry after the Polish Reunification in 1918?”, Explorations in Economic  
History 44 (2007), pp. 22-42. 
Wooldridge, J.M., Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002).  
Wooldridge, J.M., “Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics,“ American   
Economic Review 93 (2003), 133-138. 
Wooldridge, J.M., “Cluster-Sample Methods in Applied Econometrics: An Extended  
Analysis,” Michigan State University mimeo, 2006. 
39 

========41========

U.S. Government Publications 
Report  on  the  Manufactures  of  the  United  States  at  the  Tenth  Census,  General  
Statistics.  Department  of  the  Interior,  Census  Office.  Washington,  
Government Printing Office 1883. 
Statistics of the Population of the United States at the Tenth Census. Department of  
the Interior, Census Office. Washington, Government Printing Office 1883. 
Report on Manufacturing Industries in the United States at the Eleventh Census:1890.  
Part  I.  Total  for  States  and  Industries.  Department  of  the  Interior,  Census  
Office. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 1895. 
Special Census Report on the Occupation of the Population of the United States at the  
Eleventh Census: 1890. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office. 1896. 
Twelfth Census of the United States, Taken in the Year 1900. Manufactures. Part I.  
United  States  by  Industries.  (Volume  VII).  United  States  Census  Office.  
Washington, 1902. 
Twelfth Census of the United States, Taken in the Year 1900. Manufactures. Part II.  
States  and  Territories.  (Volume  VIII).  United  States  Census  Office.  
Washington, 1902. 
Occupation at the Twelve Census. Department  of Commerce  and  Labor, Bureau of  
the Census. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1904. 
Thirteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1910. Manufactures 1909.  
General  Report  and  Analysis.  (Volume  VIII).  Department  of  Commerce,  
Bureau of Census. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1913. 
Thirteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1910. Manufactures 1909.  
Reports  by  States,  with  Statistics  for  Principal  Cities.  (Volume  IX).  
40 

========42========

Department  of  Commerce,  Bureau  of  Census.  Washington,  Government  
Printing Office, 1912. 
Fourteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1920. Manufactures 1919.  
General  Report  and  Analytical  Tables.  (Volume  VIII).  Department  of  
Commerce,  Bureau  of  Census.  Washington,  Government  Printing  Office,  
1923. 
Fourteenth Census of the United States Taken in the Year 1920. Manufactures 1919. 
Reports  for  States,  with  Statistics  for  Principal  Cities.  (Volume  IX).  
Department  of  Commerce,  Bureau  of  Census.  Washington,  Government  
Printing Office, 1923. 
Report  on  the  Statistics  of  Wages  in  Manufacturing  Industries  with  Supplementary  
Reports  on  the Average  Retail  Prices  of  Necessaries  of  Life  and  on  Trades  
Societies, and Strikes and Lockouts, Washington, Government Printing Office,  
1886. 
Retail  Prices  and  Wages.  Report  by  Mr.  Aldrich,  from  the  Committee  on  Finance,  
Part 2, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1892. 
Retail Prices 1890 to 1911, Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor, no. 105,  
Part 1, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1912. 
The  Structure  of  the  National  Economy,  Part  1:  Basic  Characteristics,  Washington,  
Government Printing Office, 1939. 
Carload  Waybill  Analyses,  1949,  State-to-State  Distribution  of  Manufactures  and  
Miscellaneous  and  Forwarder  Traffic.  Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  
Bureau  of  Transport  Economics  and  Statistics,  Statement  No.  5110,  
Washington, 1951. 
41 

========43========

Appendix 
Dependent Variable 
The share of manufacturing labor force at the two-digit SIC level in the U.S. state: The data  
are taken from the U.S.  Census of Manufactures 1880-1920. We aggregated them into the  
two-digit SIC level using Niemi (1974) classification. The censuses provide information on  
the average number of wage earners, and from  1889 on the average number of employees  
with a breakdown to wage earners and salaried personnel. We have used the average number  
of wage earners to make the data comparable over time. The 1910 Census of Manufactures  
excluded so-called hand trades which are the industries providing repair work or work based  
on  individual  orders,  e.g.  bicycle  repairing,  furniture  repairing,  blacksmithing,  jewelry  
engraving. To make the data comparable, we have excluded the hand trades in other years as  
well. The Census of Manufactures reports a special industry category called „All Other‟. This  
industry  category  contains  less  than  one  percent  of  the  state‟s  total  manufacturing  
employment  and  includes  the  industries  with  a  small  number  of  firms  to  prevent  the  
identification  of  those  firms.  As  a  result,  this  category  contains  a  heterogeneous  set  of  
industries which makes it difficult to assign it to any of the SIC categories. We have decided  
to perform the analysis with this industry category assigned to SIC 39, miscellaneous, as well  
as without that industry. The results are virtually unchanged and the regression analysis in the  
main text is conducted with the exclusion of this industry group. 
Independent variables 
Industry characteristics 
The share of white-collar workers: This is calculated as the share of salaried personnel in the  
total  persons  employed.  The  data  are  taken  from  the  U.S.  Census  of  Manufactures  1880- 
1920. Similarly to the data on the manufacturing employment, we aggregated them up to the  
42 

========44========

two-digit  SIC  level  using  Niemi  (1974)  classification.  Salaried  personnel  include  officers,  
clerks, and firm members. There are no data on salaried personnel in 1879 and thus we used  
1889 shares. The hand trades are excluded for the same reason as in the case of the dependent  
variable. 
Steam Horse Power per $1000 Gross Output: The data are taken from the U.S. Census of  
Manufactures  1880-1920  and  again  we  aggregated  them  into  the  two-digit  SIC  level.  The  
steam-horse power data in 1879 are provided only for 22 industries, and therefore we have  
used 1889 figures. The hand trades are excluded for the same reason as stated above. 
Plant size: The figures are taken from O‟Brien (1988), Table 4. Plant size is calculated as the  
average number of wage earners per establishment. The hand-trades are excluded. O‟Brien  
does not provide plant size in SIC 30, Rubber and Plastic Products, in 1879, and therefore we  
calculated  it  from  the  U.S.  Census  of  Manufactures  1879  using  the  same  set  of  industries  
belonging to that SIC as used by O‟Brien for other years (the industries include belting and  
hose rubber, and boots and shoe rubber).      
Agricultural Input Use, Intermediate Input Use, Sales to Industry, Mineral Resources Use:  
The figures are calculated from Whitney‟s (1968) input-output table for 1899, and they are  
expressed  relative  to  the  gross  value  of  output.  Whitney‟s  input-output  table  provides  a  
breakdown of the whole economy into twenty nine sectors including agriculture, industries,  
and services. We had to aggregate some of the industries to match the two-digit SIC level. In  
particular, processed food, and  grain mill products were aggregated into SIC 20,  food and  
kindred  products;  petroleum  products,  and  coal  products  into  SIC  29,  petroleum  and  coal  
products;  shipbuilding,  transportation,  and  transport  equipment  into  SIC  37,  transport  
equipment. Whitney‟s input-output table does not allow calculation of the figures for SIC 20,  
Tobacco  and  Tobacco  Products,  SIC  25,  Furniture  and  Fixtures,  SIC  34,  Fabricated  Metal  
Products, and SIC 38, Instruments and Related Products. Therefore, we have used Leontief‟s  
1919 input-output table for SIC 20, 25, 34, and Thomas‟s (1984) input-output table for Great  
Britain in 1907 for SIC 38. Using the figure from the British input-output table does not pose  
43 

========45========

a  problem.  These  products  were  unlikely  to  be  produced  differently  in  the  U.S.  and  Great  
Britain since most of these activities did not use mass production technology.  
State characteristics 
The share of population: from U.S. Millennial Statistics (2006), Table Cc125-137, pp. 3-183- 
3-184   
The share of total manufacturing labor force: from Perloff (1960), Table A-6, p. 632.  
The share of total agriculture labor force: from Perloff (1960), Table A-2, p. 624. 
The share of total mining and quarrying labor force: from Perloff (1960), Table A-3, p. 626.   
The  share  of  skilled  labor  force:  The  share  of  the  skilled  labor  force  in  1880-1900  is  
calculated  from the  U.S. Population Statistics and the U.S. Occupational Statistics. Skilled  
labor is considered to be the labor force in professional occupations. The data for 1910 and  
1920 are from Goldin (1998) (we have used Goldin‟s 1928 figures since no data for 1920  
exist). 
The share of farm land: calculated from U.S. Millennial Statistics (2006), Table Da159-224,  
pp. 4-50 - 4-53, Table Cf8-64, pp. 3-346 - 3-348. 
Market potential: The methodology and some of the sources are outlined in detail in the text.  
Here we provide details of the calculation of the foreign market potential. The nominal GDPs  
and the exchange rates between the foreign currencies and the $US in 1880-1910 are taken  
from Flandreau and Zumer (2004) except for Canada, Mexico, and the $US/GBP exchange  
rate,  which  is  from  Officer  (2008).  The  foreign  countries  include  Argentina,  Austria- 
Hungary,  Belgium,  Brazil,  Canada,  Denmark,  France,  Germany,  Greece,  Italy,  Mexico,  
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Great Britain. The  
nominal GDP of Mexico and the exchange rate between pesos and $US come from Estadicas  
Historicas de Mexico (1990). The Canadian nominal GDP is divided into provinces and the  
figures come from Green (1971), Table B-1, B-2, B-3. Green provides data for 1890, 1910,  
and 1929 respectively. 1900 and 1920 figures had to be calculated using the shares of the  
44 

========46========

provinces‟ GDP on the total Canadian GDP. Specifically, we have taken the average of 1890  
and  1910  shares  to  obtain  1900  shares  and  the  average  of  1910  and  1929  to  obtain  1920  
shares. Then we used the total Canadian GDP (Mitchell, 2003, Table J1) in 1900 and 1920  
respectively to calculate the GDP of provinces in those years. To simplify the calculations,  
we have considered Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia and New Brunswick as one province  
as well  as  Alberta,  Manitoba,  and  Saskatchewan.  1880  values  were  extrapolated  using  the  
Canadian nominal GDP growth rate 1880-1890  calculated  from Mitchell (2003), Table J1.  
The  nominal  GDP  in  1920  are  from  Mitchell  (2003),  Table  J1  and  the  foreign  countries 
include  Brazil,  Canada,  Cuba,  Denmark,  France,  Germany,  Italy,  Netherlands,  Norway,  
Spain, Sweden, and Great Britain. Data on Mexico are for 1921 and are taken from Estadicas  
Historicas de Mexico (1990). The exchange rates between the $US and foreign currencies are  
calculated  from  U.S.  Millennial  Statistics  (2006),  Table  Ee621-636,  pp.  5-567-5-572  and  
Table Ee637-645, p. 5-572.  
Coal prices: There are no satisfactory data on the wholesale prices of coal for every U.S. state  
in 1880-1920 and thus we have to rely on the retail prices. The prices in 1880 are taken from  
the  „Report  on  the  Statistics  of  Wages  in  Manufacturing  Industries  with  Supplementary  
Reports  on  the  Average  Retail  Prices  of  Necessaries  of  Life  and  on  Trades  Societies,  and  
Strikes and Lockouts‟ (1886); the prices in 1890 are from „Retail Prices and Wages. Report  
by Mr. Aldrich, from the Committee on Finance, Part 2‟ (1892); the prices in 1910 are from  
„Retail Prices 1890 to 1911, Bulletin of the United States Bureau of Labor, no. 105, part 1‟  
(1912). The data for Washington, Arizona, Oklahoma and Wyoming are missing and were  
proxied them by the coal prices from the nearby states, in particular by Oregon, New Mexico,  
Texas, and Montana respectively. The coal prices in 1900 and 1920 were obtained by using  
the index from the U.S. Millennial Statistics (2006), Table Cc125-137, pp. 3-183-3-184.    
45 

========47========

Table 1: US Passenger Vehicle and Vehicle Parts Trade in  
1949 
Panel A: US States Exporting Passenger Vehicles  
to other US States 
State 
Carloads 
California Illinois Indiana Michigan Ohio Pennsylvania Total  
% 
491 42 129 901 57 1 1621 
30.29 2.59 7.96 55.58 3.52 0.06 100.00 
Panel B: Imports of Vehicle Parts to Michigan 
State 
Carloads 
Illinois Indiana Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Missouri New Jersey New York Ohio Tennessee West Virginia Wisconsin Total Sources: see text 
% 
10 54 2 204 1 5 6 40 160 12 9 76 579 
1.73 9.33 0.35 35.23 0.17 0.86 1.04 6.91 27.63 2.07 1.55 13.13 100.00 
46 

========48========

Table 2.- Industry Characteristics in 1899 and Manufacturing Employment in 1880 and 1920. 
Panel A.- Industry Characteristics, 1899 
SIC 
Intermediate  Input Use 
Food and kindred product  Tobacco and tobacco product Textile mill product 
Apparel and related products Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures 
Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Rubber and plastic products Leather and leather products Stone, clay, and glass products Primary metal products Fabricated metal products Machinery  
Transportation equipment Instruments and related products Miscellaneous manufacturing  
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35, 36 37 38 39 
18.2 1.7 24.6 46.2 38.9 43.2 38.5 23.9 37.3 23.4 22.4 51.1 21.0 47.8 10.4 32.3 25.9 51.6 26.8 
Sales to  Industry 11.7 
0 57.8 
9.0 54.2 
5.9 63.0 14.3 42.8 33.1 30.3 37.4 23.5 58.4 25.6 22.6 35.7 
15 15.7 
Agricultural  Input Use 
23.6 
18.9 
19.9 
1.7 
7.1 
0.0 
6.7 
0.0 
11.2 
0.0 
0.0 
8.2 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.4 
0.0 
1.3 
Mineral  Resources Use 
1.3 
0.1 
0.7 
0.2 
0.1 
0.5 
2.4 
0.9 
4.3 
10.7 
1.2 
0.2 
10.3 
4.6 
0.7 
10.4 
2.1 
0.02 
10.2 
Panel B.- Manufacturing Employment (%) 1880, 1920 
MB 
Food and kindred product  Tobacco and tobacco product Textile mill product 
Apparel and related products Lumber and wood products Furniture and fixtures 
Paper and allied products Printing and publishing Chemicals and allied products Petroleum and coal products Rubber and plastic products Leather and leather products Stone, clay, and glass products Primary metal products Fabricated metal products Machinery  
Transportation equipment Instruments and related products Miscellaneous manufacturing  Total Manufacturing 
Population 
75.25 
78.97 
94.63 
93.73 
77.00 
87.58 
95.76 
83.15 
69.25 
91.31 
99.97 
84.88 
81.09 
90.22 
89.68 
89.35 
86.16 
94.36 
96.46 
86.83 
57.55 
Notes: The figures in Panel A are for the manufacturing sector and are expressed as the percentages  of the gross output. The figures in Panel B are the percentages of the U.S. total in the corresponding category.  MB stands for the Manufacturing Belt. Sources: Panel A: Whitney (1968), SIC 21, 25, and 34 are from Leontief  (1941), SIC 38 is from Thomas (1984). Panel B: U.S. Census of Manufactures 1880, 1920, Perloff (1960), 
20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35, 36 37 38 39 
U.S. Millennial Statistics (2006). 
1880 
Outside MB 
24.75 
21.03 
5.37 
6.27 
23.00 
12.42 
4.24 
16.85 
30.75 
8.69 
0.03 
15.12 
18.91 
9.78 
10.32 
10.65 
13.84 
5.64 
3.54 
13.17 
42.45 
MB 61.05 71.27 75.79 88.97 40.69 81.62 92.61 74.08 72.48 54.25 98.35 88.87 80.72 92.31 88.22 93.00 73.03 95.07 90.92 76.96 53.37 
1920 
Outside MB 
38.95 
28.73 
24.21 
11.03 
59.31 
18.38 
7.39 
25.92 
27.52 
45.75 
1.65 
11.13 
19.28 
7.69 
11.78 
7.00 
26.97 
4.93 
9.08 
23.04 
46.63 
47 

========49========

Table 3. -Market Potential and the Rank of States Based on Market Potential in 1880 and 1920 
Market Potential Estimates Based on  δ = -1, in millions of current $US 
1880 Market Potential 
Rank 
Rhode Island Connecticut Massachusetts New Jersey New York New Hampshire Pennsylvania Delaware Maryland Vermont Ohio 
Indiana West Virginia Illinois Kentucky Virginia Maine Michigan Wisconsin Missouri North Carolina Tennessee Iowa 
South Carolina Georgia Kansas Minnesota Source: see text 
32.13 31.88 30.21 28.51 28.32 26.75 26.06 25.47 25.41 23.15 21.33 20.07 18.98 18.97 18.86 18.84 18.63 18.22 16.13 15.88 15.70 15.65 15.18 13.90 13.81 13.13 12.89 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 
1920 Market Potential 
Rank 
209.97 212.41 195.34 197.30 188.45 170.47 172.66 174.78 167.74 145.70 142.00 131.91 127.26 129.24 123.05 123.17 112.23 121.63 107.03 106.90 102.30 102.11 98.73 89.66 89.53 87.99 84.09 
2 1 4 3 5 8 7 6 9 10 11 12 14 13 16 15 18 17 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 
Alabama Nebraska Arkansas Mississippi Florida Louisiana Oklahoma South Dakota North Dakota Wyoming Colorado Texas Nevada New Mexico Utah Montana California Idaho Washington Oregon Arizona 
48 
1880 Market Potential 
Rank 
1920 Market Potential 
Rank 
12.62 12.61 12.37 11.94 10.99 10.91 10.23 9.69 9.24 8.91 8.71 8.69 8.09 7.84 7.37 7.34 7.23 7.00 6.74 6.71 6.66 
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 
81.59 83.56 82.31 77.13 70.54 69.97 72.58 63.87 59.09 58.42 57.28 59.54 55.84 50.76 47.32 46.30 47.53 45.38 47.70 44.44 42.02 
29 28 29 31 33 34 32 35 37 38 39 36 40 41 44 45 43 46 42 47 48 

========50========

Table 4. - Pooled OLS, Panel Data Fixed Effect, 1880-1920  Forward and Backward Linkages based on 1899 Input-Output Table 
POLS Cluster-Robust SE 
Agric. Employment x 
agric. Input use Educated pop.  X 
white-collar workers Coal abundance x 
steam power use 
Market potential x 
interm. input use Market potential x 
industry sale Market potential x 
size of establishment State-Industry Dummies No. observations 
Adj. R-squared 
I 
II FE Panel Robust SE  
H-O Forces 
0.002*** [0.0003] 0.0008 [0.0006] 0.006 [0.02] 
0.002*** [0.0003] 0.0006 [0.0006] 0.009 [0.02] 
Market Potential Forces 
0.00003 [0.00009] 0.00028*** [0.00006] 0.00013*** [0.00001] 
Yes 
4560 
0.64 
0.00003 [0.00009] 0.00027*** [0.00006] 0.00013*** [0.00001] 
Yes 
4560 
0.53 
Breusch-Pagan heteroskedasticity test: chi-square(2) = 1129.7*** 
robust Hausman test: chi-square (11)=298.757*** 
Sources: see text; Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% Note: POLS - Pooled OLS, FE - Fixed Effect, clustered standard errors at the U.S. state level 
49 

========51========

Table 5.- OLS and Cluster-Specific Fixed Effect Estimations Year by Year 
Forward and Backward Linkages based on 1899 Input-Output Table 
1880 
OLS  
Agric. farm land x 
agric. Input use Educated pop. x 
white-collar workers Coal abundance x 
steam power use 
0.0006 [0.0005] 
0.006 
[0.004] 
0.16** 
[0.08] 
Market potential x 
interm. input use Market potential x 
industry sale Market potential x 
size of establishment 
0.0013 [0.0009] 0.002*** [0.0007] 0.0009*** [0.0002] 
Constant 
State-industry dummy Observations 
R-squared 
Breusch-Pagan chi2(1) F-test Joint Significance H-O 
-3.79*** [0.67] Yes 
912 0.75 304.4*** 2.2* 
1890 
1900 
FE 
OLS  
FE 
OLS  
FE 
H-O Forces 
0.0006 [0.0004] 
0.0014** [0.0006] 
0.0014** [0.0006] 
0.0011** [0.0005] 
0.001** 
[0.0005] 
0.0061 
-0.001 
-0.001 
-0.021*** 
-0.02*** 
[0.0041] 
[0.008] 
[0.0078] 
[0.005] 
[0.005] 
0.16** 
-0.17** 
-0.17** 
0.02 
0.02 
[0.07] 
[0.08] 
[0.079] 
[0.05] 
[0.05] 
Market Potential Forces 
0.0013 [0.0009] 0.002*** [0.0007] 0.0009*** [0.0002] 
0.003*** [0.0001] 0.0008 [0.0007] 0.0008*** [0.0002] 
0.003*** [0.0009] 0.0008 [0.0007] 0.0008*** [0.0002] 
0.002*** [0.0007] 0.0013** [0.0006] 0.0007*** [0.0002] 
0.002*** 
[0.0007] 0.0013** [0.0005] 0.0007*** 
[0.0002] 
-3.55*** [0.67] Yes 912 0.46 
-2.29 [1.37] Yes 912 0.45 
1.26 [1.54] Yes 912 0.48 
3.1** 
-1.05 [1.21] Yes 
912 
0.7 218.1*** 2.96** 
3.24** 
0.27 [1.24] Yes 
912 0.67 293.3*** 4.8** 
7.7*** 
1910 
1920 
OLS  
FE 
OLS  
FE 
0.0009* [0.0005] 
0.0009* [0.0005] 
0.00009 [0.0004] 
0.00009 [0.0004] 
-0.0013 
-0.002 
0.001 
0.001 
[0.004] 
[0.004] 
[0.001] 
[0.001] 
0.06 
0.04** 
0.01 
0.01 
[0.069] 
[0.02] 
[0.03] 
[0.03] 
0.0023*** [0.0006] 0.0002 [0.0004] 0.0004*** [0.00008] 
0.0022*** [0.0006] 0.0002 [0.0004] 0.0004*** [0.00008] 
0.0007*** [0.0002] 0.00023** [0.00009] 0.00005*** [0.00002] 
0.0007*** [0.0002] 0.00023** [0.00009] 0.00005*** [0.00002] 
-3.35*** [1.13] Yes 
912 0.64 236.1*** 1.05 
-3.5** [1.56] Yes 912 0.46 
-2.17** [0.89] Yes 
912 0.62 257.1*** 0.23 
-2.7** [1.2] Yes 912 0.36 
1.92 
0.3 
Sources: see text; Notes: * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significan t at 1%,  
OLS - cluster-robust se, FE - cluster-specific fixed effect with cluster-robust se, clusters at the U.S. state level Degrees of Freedom in F-test are (3, 47) for OLS and FE 
50 

========52========

Table 6.- 2SLS Instrumental Variable Estimation Forward and Backward Linkages based on 1899 Input-Output Table 
Agric. farm land x 
agric. Input use 
Educated pop. x 
white-collar workers 
Coal abundance x 
steam power use 
Market potential x 
interm. input use 
Market potential x 
industry sale 
Market potential x 
size of establishment 
Constant 
State-industry dummy Observations R2 
Shea Partial R2 
mp1vs2_intermed 
mp1vs2_sale 
mp1vs2_plant 
Endog. C test [chisq (4)] Joint Significance Heckscher-Ohlin, chi2(3) Sources: see text 
1880 
1890 
H-O Forces 
0.0004 [0.0005] 0.0056 [0.004] 0.15** [0.07] 
0.001* [0.0006] -0.012 [0.008] -0.2** [0.08] 
0.0009* [0.0005] -0.02*** 
Market Potential Forces 
0.0008 [0.001] 0.0026*** [0.0009] 0.0005* [0.0002] 
0.003** [0.001] 0.001 [0.001] 0.0005** [0.0002] 
0.002** [0.0008] 0.002*** [0.0006] 0.0005*** [0.0002] 
-3.42*** [0.73] Yes 912 0.74 
-0.57 [1.24] Yes 912 0.7 
0.75 0.74 0.77 17.16*** 
0.76 0.76 0.77 13.32*** 
6.48* 
8.4** 
24.3*** 
1900 
1910 
1920 
[0.006] 0.024 [0.05] 
0.0006 [0.0005] -0.002 [0.004] 0.07 [0.07] 
-0.00003 [0.0004] 0.001 [0.001] 0.014 [0.04] 
0.0019** [0.0009] 0.0008* [0.0005] 0.0002** [0.00009] 
0.0007** [0.0003] 0.0003*** [0.0001] 0.00002 [0.00002] 
0.65 [1.36] Yes 912 0.67 
-2.75** [1.25] Yes 912 0.64 
-2.09** [0.92] Yes 912 0.62 
0.76 0.75 0.78 9.13* 
0.76 0.78 0.77 17.4*** 
0.76 0.76 0.76 8.12* 
3.55 
0.89 
Notes: regression with cluster-robust se, Cluster at the U.S. state level, * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% 
51 

========53========

Table 7.- Beta Coefficients, Estimations Year by Year 
1880 
1890 
1900 
1910 
1920 
H-O Forces 
Agric. farm land x 
agric. Input use Educated pop. x 
white-collar workers Coal abundance x 
steam power use 
0.05 
0.09 
0.09 
0.07 
0.008 
0.035 
-0.07 
-0.24 
-0.02 
0.06 
0.12 
-0.09 
0.02 
0.05 
0.01 
Market Potential Forces 
Market potential x 0.06 0.19 0.17 0.33 0.25 
interm. input use 
Market potential x 0.13 0.06 0.15 0.04 0.1 
industry sale 
Market potential x 0.27 0.27 0.36 0.42 0.23 
size of establishment 
Note: The table presents only the beta coefficients of the interaction variables. The full set of the beta coefficients is available from the authors upon request. The beta coefficients are defined as  beta(i)=[s(xi)/s(y)]*b(xi) where b(xi) is the estimates of xi, s(xi) is the standard deviation of xi and s(y) is the standard deviation of y. 
Beta coefficients are calculated from the OLS regressions in Table 4.  
Sources: see text 
52 

========54========

Table 8: Economic importance of market potential, coal prices and farm land in U.S. states' shares of manufacturing employment  in 1890 (percentage change). 
U.S. State 
Change of market potential (50%) 
Change of share of farm land (50%) 
Change of coal prices (50%) 
Increase 
Decrease 
Increase 
Decrease 
Decrease 
Increase 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
Nebraska Utah California Washington 
55.22 37.95 34.43 33.66 
0.162 0.009 0.078 0.036 
0.21 0.14 0.32 0.37 
Illinois New York Ohio Pennsylvania 
-40.85 -44.82 -42.14 -44.47 
-0.310 -0.263 -0.326 -0.233 
-0.15 -0.11 -0.13 -0.03 
The table reports the predicted effect of a change in geographical and economic characteristics of the U.S. states on their share of  manufacturing employment in total U.S. manufacturing employment. The predicted effects are based on the estimated coefficients for the year 1890 in Table 4, equation FE. The relocation of a U.S. state is implemented by changing its market potential. 
53 

========55========

Table 9: Contribution of forward linkages, backward linkages, and plant size to the change of the share of a U.S. state manufacturing employment in  U.S. total manufacturing employment due to the counterfactual change of market potential in 1890. 
Contribution of linkages and plant size to change in manufacturing employment  
Contribution to  percentage  
change 
(1) 
(2) 
Contribution to the loss or gain of U.S. state  
manufacturing employment/ U.S total  manufacturing employment as a result of  
counterfactual 
(3) 
State of New York (counterfactual decline of NY's market potential by 50%) 
   
The share of NY's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment in 1890 
16.27 
Forward linkages 
24.61 
4.00 
Decline of share of NY's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment as a result of counterfactual  (percentage change) 
44.80 
Backward linkages 
6.07 
0.99 
The share of NY's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment that is lost as a result of  counterfactual  
7.29 
Plant size 
14.15 
2.30 
The share of NY's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment as a result of counterfactual 
8.98 
Total 
44.80 
7.29 
California (counterfactual increase of California's market potential by 50%) 
The share of California's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment in 1890 
2.27 
Forward linkages 
18.90 
0.43 
Increase of share of California's manufacturing employment in  U.S total manufacturing employment as a result of counterfactual  (percentage change) 
34.43 
Backward linkages 
4.66 
0.11 
The share of California's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employmentthat is gained as a result of  counterfactual  
0.78 
Plant size 
10.87 
0.25 
The share of California's manufacturing employment in U.S total  manufacturing employment as a result of counterfactual 
3.05 
Total 
34.43 
0.78 
Sources and notes: Column 1: the percentage change of a state's share of manufacturing employment in U.S. total manufacturing employment  
is from Table 7, columns 1 and 2; the sources of the manufacturing employment shares in 1890 are in the appendix.   
Column 2: the figures are calculated using the same procedure as in Table 7. An example for the state of New York shows the calculation of the remaining figures: column  1: 7.29=16.27*(0.448); 8.98=16.27-7.29; column 3 forward linkages: 4.0=7.29*(24.61/44.8). 
54 

========56========

55 

========57========

