September 2010 
               No.23 
Lessons from the 1930s Great Depression 
Nicholas Crafts (University of Warwick) and  
Peter Fearon (University of Leicester) 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Lessons from the 1930s Great Depression 
Nicholas Crafts 
(University of Warwick) 
Peter Fearon 
(University of Leicester) 
September 2010 
Abstract 
This paper provides a survey of the Great Depression comprising both a narrative account and a detailed review of the empirical evidence focusing especially on the experience of the United States. We examine the reasons for and flawed resolution of the American banking crisis as well as the conduct of fiscal and monetary policy. We also consider the pivotal role of the gold standard in the international transmission of the slump and leaving gold as a route to recovery. Policy lessons from the Great Depression for today are discussed as are some implications for macroeconomics. 
Keywords: banking crisis; fiscal multiplier; gold standard; Great Depression 
JEL Classification: E65; N12; N14 
Acknowledgements 
We thank Steve Broadberry and Ken Wallis for helpful discussions. Chris Adam, Ken Mayhew and, especially, Chris Allsopp made very thoughtful comments on an earlier draft. The usual disclaimer applies. 

========2========

1.0 Introduction 
The Great Depression deserves its title. The economic crisis that began in 1929 soon 
engulfed virtually every manufacturing country and all food and raw materials producers. In 
1931, Keynes observed that the world was then “…in the middle of the greatest economic 
catastrophe …of the modern world…there is a possibility that when this crisis is looked back 
upon by the economic historian of the future it will be seen to mark one of the major 
turning points” (Keynes, 1931). Keynes was right; Table 1 shows some of the dimensions. 
What are the key questions that we should ask about the Great Depression? Why did the 
crisis begin in 1929 is an obvious start but more important questions are why it was so deep 
and why it lasted so long? Sustained recovery did not begin in the United States until the 
spring of 1933, though the UK trough occurred in late 1931 and in Germany during the 
following year. Why and how did the depression spread so that it became an international 
catastrophe? What role did financial crises play in prolonging and transmitting economic 
shocks? How effective were national economic policy measures designed to lessen the 
impact of the depression? Did governments try to co-ordinate their economic policies? If 
not, then why not? Why did the intensity of the depression and the recovery from it vary so 
markedly between countries? 
Even in recovery both the UK and the USA experienced persistent mass unemployment, 
which was the curse of the depression decade (Table 2). Why did the eradication of 
unemployment prove to be so intractable? In 1937-38 a further sharp depression hit the US 
economy increasing unemployment and imposing further deflation. What caused this 
serious downturn and what lessons did policy makers draw from it? 
By the late twentieth century, the memory of international financial seizure in the US and 
Europe, mass unemployment and severe deflation had receded. However, during 2007-08, 
an astonishing and unexpected collapse occurred which caused all key economic variables 
to fall at a faster rate than they had during the early 1930s. As Eichengreen and O’Rourke 
(2010) report, the volume of world trade, the performance of equity markets and industrial 
output dropped steeply in 2008. Moreover, a full blown financial crisis quickly emerged. The 
1 

========3========

US housing boom collapsed and sub-prime mortgages which had been an attractive 
investment both at home and abroad now became a millstone round the necks of those 
financial institutions that had eagerly snapped then up. In April 2007, New Century 
Financial, one of the largest sub-prime lenders in the US filed for Chapter11 bankruptcy. In 
August, Bear Stearns, an international finance house heavily involved in the sub-prime 
market, teetered on the verge of bankruptcy. The US Treasury helped finance its sale to J.P. 
Morgan during the following year. During 2008 the financial crisis developed with a sudden 
and terrifying force. In September, Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae, which together accounted 
for half of the outstanding mortgages in the US, were subject to a federal takeover because 
their financial condition had deteriorated so rapidly. At the same time Lehman Brothers, the 
fourth largest investment bank in the US, declared bankruptcy. It seemed as if financial 
meltdown was not only a possibility, it was a certainty unless drastic action was taken. 
The crisis was not confined to the US. In August 2007, the French bank BNP Paribus 
suspended three investment funds worth 2bn. euros because of problems in the US sub- 
prime sector. Meanwhile, the European Central Bank was forced to intervene to restore 
calm to distressed credit markets which were badly affected by losses from sub-prime 
hedge funds. On September 14 2007, the British public became aware that Northern Rock, 
which had moved into sub-prime lending after concluding a deal with Lehman Brothers, had 
approached the Bank of England for an emergency loan. Immediately the bank’s shares fell 
by 32 percent and queues formed outside branch offices as frantic depositors rushed to 
withdraw their savings. Such was the pressure that Northern Rock was nationalised in 
February 2008. The run on Northern Rock was an extraordinary event for the UK. During the 
great depression no British financial institution failed, or looked like failing, but in 2007 
there was immediate depositor panic. It was clear that without some assurance on the 
security of deposits other institutions were at risk. In 2009, UK GDP contracted by 4.8 
percent, the steepest fall since 1921. 
A comparison of the catastrophic banking crisis in 1931 with that of 2007/08 shows that the 
countries involved in 1931 accounted for 55.6 percent of world GDP while the figure for the 
latter period is 33.5 percent ( Reinhart, 2010; Maddison, 2010). This is the most widespread 
banking crisis since 1931 and it is also the first time since that date that major European 
countries and the United States have both been involved. The financial tidal wave was 
2 

========4========

totally unexpected and was of such severity that immediate policy action was required to 
prevent total melt down. For a while it seemed that the world stood at the edge of an abyss, 
a short step away from an even greater economic disaster than had occurred three 
quarters of a century earlier. 
In these circumstances, it has been natural to ask what the historical experience of the crisis 
of the 1930s has to teach us. The big lesson that has been correctly identified is not to be 
passive in the face of large adverse financial shocks. Indeed, aggressive monetary and fiscal 
policies were immediately implemented to halt the financial disintegration. Fortunately, 
countries were not constrained by the oppressive stranglehold of the gold standard. Both 
monetary and fiscal policies could be used to support economic expansion rather than to 
impose deflation or try to restore a balanced budget. Flexible exchange rates gave policy 
makers the freedom to use devaluation as an aid to recovery. The exception was in the 
Eurozone where weak member states, for example, Greece, Ireland and Portugal, were 
forced to deflate their economies (Eichengreen and Temin, 2010). 
In the United States, the Fed began aggressively to lower interest rates in January 2008 and 
by the year’s end had adopted a zero-rate policy. Quantitative easing was used on a massive 
scale during 2008 through to early 2010 and, as a result, the money supply rose 
dramatically. The American Restoration and Recovery Act, which became law in early 2009, 
earmarked $787b to stimulate the economy and was described by Christina Romer, 
distinguished economic historian of the great depression and Chair of the President’s 
Council of Economic Advisors, as “the biggest and boldest countercyclical action in American 
History” (Romer, 2009). In the UK, the Bank of England adopted the lowest interest rates 
since its foundation in 1694, quantitative easing was used aggressively and bank bailouts 
were funded where necessary. In October 2007 the guarantee for UK bank deposits was 
raised to £36K per depositor and further increased to £50K during the following year. In 
both countries, monetary and fiscal policies were pursued on a scale that would have been 
unacceptable during the 1930s but crucially these bold initiatives prevented financial 
meltdown. Fortunately, the crisis did not encourage the adoption of the beggar thy 
neighbour policies that helped to reduce the level of international trade so drastically during 
the thirties. 
3 

========5========

This represents a dramatic contrast with the policy stances of 80 years ago. Thus far, the 
upshot is that a repeat of the great depression has been avoided (Table 1). A dramatic 
financial collapse has been averted, economic recovery, though tenuous, is progressing and 
unemployment has not reached the levels that some commentators feared when the 
downturn began. As we shall see, the ‘experiment’ of the 1930s shows only too clearly the 
likely outcome in the absence of an aggressive policy response. 
The 1930s has more to offer. In particular, we can look not only at the downturn but also 
the recovery phase. Here the issues that had to be addressed included re-regulation of the 
banking system, avoiding a double-dip recession, and dealing with the various legacies of 
the depression which included long-term unemployment and the need for a new, post gold- 
standard, macroeconomic policy framework. 
This paper proceeds in the following way. Section 2 provides a narrative of events, Section 3 
delivers an analysis of the 1930s depression, and Section 4 identifies important policy 
lessons from that experience. 
2. Narrative 
(a) The Context of the Great Depression 
It is sensible to begin an investigation of the great depression with an analysis the world’s 
most powerful economy, the USA. During the 1920s America became the vital engine for 
sustained recovery from the effects of the Great War and for the maintenance of 
international economic stability. Following a rapid recovery from the postwar slump of 
1920/1, until the end of the decade Americans enjoyed a great consumer boom which was 
heavily dependent upon the automobile and the building sectors. High levels of investment, 
significant productivity advances, stable prices, full employment, tranquil labour relations, 
high wages and high company profits combined to create the perfect conditions for a stock 
market boom. Many contemporaries believed that a new age of cooperative capitalism had 
dawned in sharp contrast to the weak economies of class ridden Europe (Barber, 1985). 
America was linked to the rest of the world through international trade as the world’s 
leading exporter and second, behind the UK, as an importer. Furthermore, after 1918 
America replaced Britain as the world’s leading international lender. The First World War 
4 

========6========

imposed an onerous and potentially destabilising indebtedness on many of the world’s 
economies. Massive war debts accumulated by Britain and France were owed to both the 
US government and to US private citizens. Britain and France sought punitive damages from 
Germany in the form of Reparations. But the post war network of inter government 
indebtedness eventually involved twenty-eight countries with Germany the most heavily in 
debt and the US owed 40 per cent of total receipts (Wolf, 2010). 
Between 1924 and 1931 the US was responsible for about 60 per cent of total international 
lending about one third of which was absorbed by Germany. American investors, attracted 
by relatively high interest rates, enabled Germany to both discharge Reparations 
responsibilities and to fund considerable improvements in living standards. Austria, 
Hungary, Greece, Italy and Poland together with several Latin American countries were also 
considered attractive opportunities by US investors. By paying for imports and by investing 
overseas the US was able to send abroad a stream of dollars which enabled other countries 
not only to import more goods but also to service their international debts. The fact that a 
high proportion of the borrowing was short term did not disturb the recipients (Feinstein et 
al., 1997). 
The majority of the world’s economies were linked to each other by the Gold Standard 
which had been suspended during World War 1 but its restoration was considered a priority 
by virtually all the major economic powers. It is easy to understand the appeal of the Gold 
Standard to contemporaries. The frightening inflations after 1918 and the severe deflation 
of 1920-21 made policy makers yearn for a system that would provide international 
economic and financial stability. To policy makers the gold standard represented a state of 
normality for international monetary relations; support for it was a continuation of the 
mentalite that had become firmly established in the late nineteenth century (Eichengreen 
and Temin, 2010). There was a widespread belief that the rules of the Gold Standard had 
imposed order within a framework of economic expansion during the forty years before 
1914 and order was certainly required in the post war world. In particular, contemporaries 
believed that the discipline of the gold standard would curb excessive public spending by 
politicians who would fear the subsequent loss of bullion, an inevitable consequence of 
their profligacy. Unfortunately the return to gold was accomplished in an uncoordinated 
fashion. Several countries (e.g. Belgium and France) adopted exchange rates that were not 
5 

========7========

only significantly below their 1913 levels, they also provided a significant competitive 
advantage. 
The reverse was true for the UK which, in 1925, returned to gold at the 1913 exchange rate 
after a deflationary squeeze had made this possible. In general, financiers and bankers 
supported the return to gold at the pre war exchange rate but as a result sterling was 
overvalued and Britain’s export industries were disadvantaged. The achievement of 
international competitiveness through deflation was the dominant force determining 
domestic economic policy during the 1920s. Unfortunately, UK exports suffered from war 
induced disruption. Markets which had been readily exploited before 1914 offered much 
reduced opportunities after 1918. UK difficulties would have been more manageable if the 
bulk of Britain’s exports had been in categories that were expanding rapidly in world 
markets. Unfortunately coal, cotton and woollen textiles and shipbuilding faced severe 
international competition. Over capacity led to high and persistent structural 
unemployment in the regions where these industries were dominant. During the 1920s, UK 
unemployment was double the pre 1913 level and also higher than in all the other major 
economic powers. On average, each year between 1923 and 1929, almost 10 per cent of the 
UK insured workforce was unemployed. The jobless were concentrated in the export 
oriented staple industries. In those parts of the economy not exposed to foreign 
competition, unemployment was closer to pre war levels. 
A further problem for Britain, and many other countries too, was the uneven distribution of 
gold stocks. The US was gold rich throughout the 1920s but after the stabilization of the 
franc in 1926 the Bank of France began to sell its foreign exchange in order to purchase 
bullion (Clarke, 1967). By 1929, the US and France had accumulated nearly 60 per cent of 
the world’s gold stock and their central banks sterilized much of their gold so that it did not 
inflate the money supply. In other words, both countries kept a high proportion of the 
world’s gold stock in their vaults and withdrawn from circulation. As a result, other 
countries were forced to deflate in order to compensate for a shortage of reserves. 
Unfortunately, the gold standard imposed penalties on countries which lost gold while the 
few which gained did so with impunity. 
6 

========8========

Gold shortages compelled UK policy makers to impose relatively high interest rates in order 
to attract foreign funds –hot money- which bolstered the country’s inadequate bullion 
reserves. Unfortunately, potential domestic investors suffered as the real cost of credit rose. 
Nevertheless, as the membership of the gold standard club grew in the 1920s, policy makers 
congratulated themselves that all major trading countries were bound together in a system 
that was dedicated to the maintenance of economic stability. 
With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the international economy was in a potentially 
precarious position in 1929. Continuing prosperity was dependent upon the capacity of the 
US economy to absorb imports and to maintain a high level of international lending. If an 
economic crisis struck the US how would the Federal Reserve deal with it? The Fed, created 
in 1913, was a relatively untested central bank. Would it act aggressively as lender of last 
resort if the banking system became stressed? Would its decentralised division into twelve 
regional reserve banks with monetary policy formulated by a seven member Board 
demonstrate weakness or strength in fighting a depression? And, should a crisis materialise, 
would the Gold Standard’s rules force contracting economies to deflate, thus worsening 
their plight rather than providing a supportive international framework? 
(b) From Boom to Slump 
In January 1928 the Federal Reserve ended several years of easy credit and embarked on a 
tight money policy. The Fed began a sale of government securities and gradually raised the 
discount rate from 3.5 percent to 5 per cent. The Fed was fully aware that a sudden rise in 
interest rates could be destabilising for business and might bring a period of economic 
prosperity to an unhappy conclusion. To avoid this possibility, the monetary authorities 
aimed to gently deflate the worrying bubble on Wall Street by making bank borrowing for 
speculation progressively more expensive. Monetary policy makers believed that by acting 
steadily rather than suddenly, speculation could be controlled without damaging legitimate 
business credit demands. It seemed a good idea at the time but unfortunately this policy 
had serious unforeseen domestic and international repercussions. The new higher rates 
made more funds from non-bank sources available to the ever rising stock market and 
speculation actually increased. Many corporations used their large balances to fund 
broker’s loans and investors who normally looked overseas found loans to Wall Street a 
7 

========9========

more attractive option. Unfortunately, countries that had become dependent on US capital 
imports, for example, Germany, were suddenly deprived of an essential support for their 
fragile economies. 
Adversely affected by Fed policies, the US the economic boom reached a peak in August 
1929 and after a few months of continuously poor corporate results the confidence of 
investors waned and eventually turned into the panic which became the Wall Street Crash in 
October 1929. After the stock market collapse the Fed embarked on vigorous open market 
operations and reduced interest rates. The Wall Street crash markedly diminished the 
wealth of stock holders and could well have adversely affected the optimism of consumers. 
But in late 1929 the market seemed to stabilise close to the level it had reached in early 
1928. For several months it appeared that the US economy was recovering after a dramatic 
financial contraction. Overseas lending revived and interest rates throughout the world 
responded to the Fed’s monetary easing. Optimists saw no reason why vigorous economic 
expansion should not be renewed, as it had been in 1922. 
The optimists were wrong. From the peak of the 1920s expansion in August 1929 to the 
trough in March 1933 output fell by 52 per cent, wholesale prices by 38 per cent and real 
income by 35 per cent. Company profits, which had been 10 per cent of GNP in 1929, were 
negative in 1931 and also during the following year. The collapse in demand centred on 
consumption and investment which experienced unprecedented falls. Gross private 
domestic investment, measured in constant prices, had reached $16.2bn in 1929; the 1933 
total was only $0.3bn. In 1926, gross expenditure on new private residential construction 
was $4,920m; in 1933 the figure had fallen to a paltry $290m. Consumer expenditure at 
constant prices fell from $79.0bn in 1929 to $64.6bn in 1933. Durables were especially 
affected; in 1929, 4.5m passenger vehicles rolled off assembly lines; in 1932, 1.1m cars were 
produced by a workforce that had been halved. Automobile manufacture and construction 
had been at the heart of the 1920s economic expansion but as they fell supporting 
industries tumbled too. Inventories were run down, raw material purchases reduced to a 
minimum and workers laid off. In particular, companies producing machinery, steel, glass, 
furniture, cement and bricks faced a collapse in demand. The number of wage earners in 
manufacturing fell by 40 per cent but many lucky enough to hang on to their jobs worked 
fewer hours and experienced pay cuts. The producers of non durable goods such as 
8 

========10========

cigarettes, textiles, shoes and clothing faced more modest declines in output and 
employment. 
The most dramatic price falls were in agriculture and a fall of 65 per cent in farm income 
was unsustainable for farm operators, especially if they were in debt. Unlike manufacturers 
individual farms did not reduce output in response to low prices. Indeed, their reaction to 
economic distress was to produce more in a desperate attempt to raise total income. The 
result was the accumulation of stocks which further depressed prices. Nor could farmers lay 
off workers as most only employed family members. As banks and other financial 
institutions foreclosed on farm mortgages, distress auctions caused so much local anger that 
the Governors of some states were obliged to suspend them. Farmers who were unable to 
pay their debts put pressure on the undercapitalised unit banks that served rural 
communities. As bank failures spread unease amongst depositors, the natural reaction of 
institutions was to engage in defensive banking. Loans were called in and lending, even for 
deserving cases, was curtailed; the banks gained liquidity by bankrupting many of their 
customers. Rural families were forced to reduce their purchases of manufactured goods 
adding to urban unemployment. The bitter irony of starving industrial workers unable to 
buy food that farmers found too unprofitable to sell helped to undermine faith in the free 
market economic system. 
The slide from mid 1929 to spring 1933 was not smooth and continuous. Periodically it 
seemed that the depression had bottomed out and recovery was under way. In spite of a 
destabilising fall in consumption during 1930 (Temin, 1976) it seemed possible that the 
economy would revive. This expectation was quashed by a wave of bank failures at the end 
of the year. Although mostly confined to small banks in the south east of the US, the failures 
gave depositors a warning sign. During the first half of 1931 the economy revived but hopes 
were dashed in the aftermath of Britain’s abandonment of the Gold Standard in September 
when a wave of bank failures served to undermine the diminishing faith of depositors who 
rushed to withdraw their money thus making the closure of their banks inevitable. Many 
kept their withdrawn funds idle rather than trust another bank with their savings. Economic 
expansion in the summer and autumn of 1932 was reversed during the policy vacuum 
between Roosevelt’s electoral victory in November 1932 and his inauguration in March 
1933. The uncertainties present during this ‘lame duck’ period led to a further wave of bank 
9 

========11========

failures which became so serious that by the time Roosevelt delivered his inaugural address 
in March 1933, the governors of the vast majority of states had declared their banks closed 
to prevent almost certain failure (Calomiris, 2010). There was a sharp difference between 
the British experience where no financial institution failed and the US where financial 
paralysis was the end result. 
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) emphasized the contraction by one third of the US money 
stock between 1929 and 1933, a reduction which they believe explains fully the severity of 
the depression. They accused the Federal Reserve of pursuing perverse monetary policies 
which transformed a recession into a major depression. It was, however, a combination of 
monetary and non-monetary causes, varying in intensity during these critical years, which 
account for the depth of this crisis (Gordon and Wilcox, 1981). Nevertheless, as Fishback 
(2010) shows, the judgement of the Fed was at times seriously flawed, although policy 
errors are sometimes more apparent with the benefit of hindsight. For example, because 
nominal interest rates had been reduced to a very low level the Fed believed that it was 
pursuing an appropriate easy money policy. Indeed, it was difficult to see how interest rates 
could be forced lower. However, the monetary authorities failed to take account of the 
savage deflation which caused real interest rates to rise to punitive levels for borrowers. The 
central bank was convinced that it was pursuing an easy money policy when the reverse was 
the case. Moreover, when faced with a policy choice, the Fed always opted to follow the 
gold standard rule. As a result, during late 1931, and also during the winter of 1932-33, the 
Fed raised interest rates to protect the dollar from external speculation in order to halt gold 
losses. Unfortunately this was the exact reverse of the low interest rate, easy credit policy 
needed to save the battered banking system. Little wonder that so many banks closed their 
doors. There is no doubt that monetary policy had serious adverse effects during the worst 
depression years. 
Unemployment was one of the great curses of the depression. Widely-accepted estimates 
show that the per cent of the US civilian labour for without work rose from 2.9 in 1929 to 
22.9 in 1932 (Table 2). Many classified as employed were on short time and some had also 
experienced wage cuts. Unlike Britain, the US had no national system of unemployment 
benefits; the jobless were subjected to a harsh regime which included dependence on 
miserly poorly administered local relief. Those most affected included the young, the old 
10 

========12========

and ethnic minorities whose unemployment rates were relatively high. In addition, social 
workers stressed that those who had been out of work for long periods became increasingly 
unattractive to employers. Loss of income and employment uncertainty combined to reduce 
consumer spending. 
Even fortunates who felt secure in their jobs and whose real incomes had risen were 
deterred by the persistent deflation. Why buy a motor vehicle, or a house, now when both 
would be significantly cheaper in a few months time. Deflation increased the burden of 
existing debt and acted as a warning against the accumulation of new obligations. Deflation 
also intensified business uncertainty and further undermined the confidence necessary to 
make investment decisions. Traditionally, price falls were seen as one of the natural self 
correcting mechanisms of the market economy. Deflation automatically led to a rise in real 
incomes, it was argued, and consumers would soon start a purchasing drive that would lift 
the economy out of recession. The persistent price falls over such a long period, however, 
brought about a paralysis in consumption and investment. Potential spenders wanted to 
wait until the price falls had reached their nadir before they committed themselves to major 
purchases and new debt. 
Herbert Hoover was hard working, energetic and intelligent. He probably had a greater 
grasp of contemporary economics than any twentieth century president and was confident 
enough to be his own economic advisor (Stein, 1988). He was familiar with the current 
literature on business cycles and was not a man to stand aside and watch as recession 
accelerated into depression (Bernstein, 2001). Hoover publicly urged business leaders to 
share scarce work rather than add to the unemployed and pleaded with them not to cut 
wage rates, which had been the instant response of employers in 1920-21. Big business held 
out against wage cuts until mid 1931 when, faced with overwhelming financial losses, the 
dam broke and they could resist no more. Nominal wage cuts became common as did mass 
lay-offs. Some critics see Hoover’s unwavering commitment to high wages and the 
maintenance of purchasing power as a serious mistake which added to the severity of the 
downturn (Ohanian, 2009; Smiley, 2002). 
Hoover refused to listen to the pleas of 1,038 American economists who, in 1930, urged him 
veto the Hawley-Smoot tariff bill. When it became law this legislation raised US import 
11 

========13========

duties and ultimately led to retaliatory action throughout the world. Not surprisingly, US 
foreign trade declined once the depression began to bite. The value of US exports was $7.0b 
in 1929 but only $2.5b in 1932; imports declined from $5.9b to $2.0b during the same 
period. Nevertheless, the US balance of payments remained in surplus. It was, however, the 
rapid income decline in countries that wanted to purchase US goods which was the most 
significant factor in causing the contraction in international trade (Irwin, 1998). Hoover’s 
support of tariff increases demonstrated his consistency. His priority was to protect 
companies that paid high wages from competition by cheap imported goods (Vedder and 
Gallaway, 1993). 
In early 1932, following Hoover’s lead, Congress approved the Reconstruction Finance 
Corporation (RFC) with a remit to lend to distressed banks. The hope that the RFC, acting as 
lender of last resort, would bring stability to the financial system was compromised by a 
Congressional decision to publicise the names of all institutions that approached the RFC for 
financial help. Hoover also authorised a large increase in federal spending on work relief 
projects but the federal budget, at 4 percent of GNP, was too small to make a noticeable 
dent in the growing social distress. Inevitably declining revenue forced the budget into 
deficit for fiscal 1931. The deficit was too small to exert an expansionary effect on the 
economy but it did enable Roosevelt to attack Hoover during the election campaign of 1932 
for failing to appreciate the necessity of economy in government. Ironically, the budget 
deficit of 1931 was the most expansionary of the entire decade though no one at the time 
saw this as a benefit. In 1932 Hoover became so concerned about the domestic and foreign 
disapproval of the federal budget deficit that spending was reduced and the Revenue Act 
(1932) introduced a raft of substantial tax increases. In spite of his efforts, the budget 
remained in the red and, not surprisingly, unemployment remained stubbornly high. 
Unfortunately Hoover’s understanding of contemporary economics led him to an 
unshakeable belief in the gold standard. He shared with many contemporary economists the 
view that fiscal and monetary policies must be directed to support gold rather than to 
directly promote domestic economic expansion or bank stability. 
(c) The Transmission of the Depression 
12 

========14========

It is easy to see that the year on year reduction in imports by the main industrial powers and 
the collapse of international lending placed many economies in great difficulty. In particular, 
a regular flow of dollars had been crucial to debtor countries, enabling them to buy goods 
and services and discharge their debt payments. Once the flow dried up, countries had to 
confront balance of payment and debt repayment problems which were entirely 
unanticipated. Primary producers had to act quickly to reduce imports and boost their 
exports as the terms of trade moved sharply against them. Desperate to curb gold and 
foreign exchange loss, they used restrictive monetary and fiscal policies to savagely deflate 
their economies. Public spending was slashed, wages were cut and misery increased but all 
to no avail. It was impossible to earn sufficient foreign currency, or to attract new 
international loans. Once the cure of deflation was judged more painful than the disease it 
was supposed to remedy, default on international loans was inevitable. When this 
happened foreign investors panicked. In 1931, US lending virtually ceased and did not 
recover during the rest of the decade. 
The key element in the transmission of the great depression, the mechanism that linked the 
economies of the world together in this downward spiral, was the gold standard. It is 
generally accepted that adherence to fixed exchange rates was the key element in 
explaining the timing and the differential severity of the crisis. Monetary and fiscal policies 
were used to defend the gold standard and not to arrest declining output and rising 
unemployment. 
Contemporaries believed that the gold standard imposed discipline on all economies 
wedded to the system. But in operation the gold standard was not even handed. As we have 
seen, states accumulating gold were not forced to inflate their currencies but when gold 
losses occurred, governments and central banks were expected to take immediate action in 
order to stem the flow. The action was always deflation but never devaluation (Temin, 
1993). Between 1927 and 1932 France experienced a surge of gold accumulation which saw 
its share of world gold reserves increase from 7 per cent to 27 per cent of the total. Since 
the gold inflow was effectively sterilized, the policies of the Bank of France created a 
shortage of reserves and put other countries under great deflationary pressure. Irwin (2010) 
concludes that, on an accounting basis, France was probably more responsible even than 
the US for the world wide deflation of 1929-33. He calculates that through their “gold 
13 

========15========

hoarding” policies the Federal Reserve and the Bank of France together directly accounted 
for half the 30 per cent fall in prices that occurred in 1930 and 1931. This illustrates a 
serious flaw in the operation of the interwar gold standard. 
When US capital flows to Germany began to dry up in 1928, the German economy was 
already experiencing an economic downturn and at the same time had a formidable 
Reparations debt to discharge. Germany was forced to deflate even though already in the 
early stages of a depression. Soon mounting unemployment and violent political unrest 
gripped the country. In May 1931 Austria’s largest bank, the Credit Anstalt, experienced 
such difficulty that speculators attacked the Austrian schilling. Austria’s gold and foreign 
exchange reserves were inadequate and soon exhausted and the country was forced to 
introduce exchange controls. Speculators then turned to Germany which had a weak 
economy, a suspect banking system, a high level of short term debt and worrying political 
divisions. 
This was an opportunity for decisive coordinated intervention by the major economic 
powers. A flawed German economy faced the possibility of a catastrophic financial crisis 
which, if not contained, could have serious ramifications for others. Who amongst the great 
powers would help? Britain was too financially enfeebled to offer more than marginal 
assistance. In June 1931 President Hoover acted by unilaterally proposing a Moratorium, for 
one year, on Reparation and War Debts payments. The Moratorium referred only to inter 
government debt. Hoover expected private debts to be honoured. His intervention was 
opposed by the French who were furious at the lack of consultation but more fundamentally 
they believed that they lost more than they gained from the Moratorium. France, with 
ample gold reserves, was in a position to assist but the political conditions attached to their 
offer of help made it impossible for Germany to accept. In August 1931, Germany 
abandoned the gold standard, introduced exchange controls and halted the free flow of 
gold and marks. Even though this was a time of falling prices, the horrors of post war 
hyperinflation were fresh in the memory of the German public and policy makers. As a 
result, the mark was not devalued and the government continued with the draconian 
deflation that had been introduced in accordance with gold standard rules. 
14 

========16========

The speculative wave then engulfed sterling. There had been obvious signs of recession in 
the UK as early as 1928 when the curtailment of US lending affected UK international trade 
in services. About 40 per cent of UK overseas trade was with primary producing countries 
which were forced to immediately restrict their spending when US credit dried up (Solomou, 
1996). The crisis worsened in 1929 as world demand collapsed and the UK experienced a 
sharp fall in the export of goods and services. Following gold standard rules, real interest 
rates rose to defend sterling and public expenditure cuts were imposed in an attempt to 
achieve budget balance. Like Austria and Germany, Britain was faced with the withdrawal of 
foreign deposits –hot money- as the holders of sterling anticipated the potential loss to 
them from devaluation. The struggle to defend the pound was all to no avail. On September 
21 Britain was forced to leave the gold standard, the first major country to do so, and 
devalue sterling. The devaluation was substantial; sterling, once free to float, fell by 25 per 
cent against the dollar though, of course, it is the multilateral effects of devaluation rather 
than the bilateral which are the most significant. Speculators then attacked the US dollar 
which, as we have seen, was defended by the Federal Reserve, though at the cost of 
compromising the banking system and intensifying and already serious depression. 
Curiously, once free from the need to pursue a deflationary monetary policy to defend 
sterling, the Bank of England actually increased the bank rate. In spite of experiencing one of 
the largest price falls in modern history, policy makers worried about the inflationary effects 
of devaluation. Fortunately, Britain had not lived through the horrors of hyperinflation, or 
indeed the high levels of inflation endured by the French before the stabilisation of the 
franc in 1926. The fears of financial instability quickly subsided and from early 1932 interest 
rates were reduced and a nominal interest rate of 2 per cent was a persistent feature of the 
British economy for the remainder of the 1930s. In contrast, fiscal policy was not 
expansionary until the end of the decade and the attraction of an annual balanced budget 
remained (Middleton, 2010). 
It is clear that unemployment was the major effect of the Great Depression as far as the UK 
is concerned. The proportion of workers who were unemployed rose to a peak of 17.0 per 
cent in 1932 (Table 2). However, other indicators show that the impact of the crisis was 
relatively benign. No British bank or building society failed during these troubled years. 
Between 1929 and 1931, the peak to trough contraction in real GDP was a mere 5.4 per cent 
15 

========17========

(Table 2). Even in these crisis years, consumption remained relatively stable. The early exit 
from the gold standard and the robustness of the financial system created a platform for UK 
recovery which could be exploited. Indeed, between 1929 and 1937, the peak of 1930s 
performance, real GDP increased by 16.4 per cent. Unfortunately, 10.1 per cent of the 
insured population remained without work in 1938 and the numbers of long-tern 
unemployed were seemingly an intractable socio-economic problem (Hatton and Thomas, 
2010). Nevertheless, the UK depression experience is a sharp contrast with that endured by 
the US (Table 2). Even today, no US macro textbook would be complete without a section 
analysing the causes and the course of the Great Depression. In the UK, apart from 
persistent unemployment, the downturn was not deep, was over quickly and recovery was 
impressive. 
1931 was, however, a watershed for UK economic policy. The gold standard was abandoned 
and sterling was devalued. Monetary policy was freed from its obligation to support the 
gold standard and could be used as a tool for economic expansion. The crisis also provided 
the incentive for Britain to turn away from an emotional commitment to Free Trade. The 
Imports Duties Act (1932) imposed a general 10 per cent duty on a range of imports. Within 
a few months, Imperial Preference instituted agreements between Commonwealth 
countries and Britain to favour each other’s exports. 
Early UK recovery was helped by a favourable exchange rate, though within a few years that 
significant advantage had gone as other countries devalued and as British tariffs improved 
the domestic trade balance. It was not foreign trade but a reflationary monetary policy that 
drove recovery. Cheap money stimulated the housing industry and, with building societies 
playing a promotional role, this sector became a visible sign of prosperity, particularly in the 
midlands and the south-east of England. Unfortunately, the regions dominated by the old 
staple industries remained depressed. Apart from unemployment, UK macro performance 
during the recovery period was impressive. Between 1932 and 1937, GDP growth averaged 
4 per cent (Table 2). 
In 1931, 47 countries were members of the gold standard club. By the end of 1932 the only 
significant members were: Belgium, France, Netherlands, Poland, Switzerland and the US 
(Eichengreen, 1992). 1931 was a dramatic year when a major financial crisis dealt a mortal 
16 

========18========

blow to the gold standard while output and prices continued to decline throughout the 
world. Far from providing stability and fulfilling the expectations of its supporters, the gold 
standard was instrumental in forcing economies to deflate during a period of intense 
depression. Indeed, departure from gold was a prerequisite for recovery. 
For a while the countries freed from the shackles of gold seemed overwhelmed by the 
enormity of their action. Policy makers were concerned that devaluation might lead to 
inflation so there was no immediate rush for expansionary economic policies. However, by 
1935 it was clear that all the countries that had devalued their currencies in 1931 had 
performed far better than those who had opted for exchange control. In 1933, the US 
decided to leave the gold standard and devalue the dollar as it was clear that New Deal 
policies designed to inflate the economy were inconsistent with the rules of the game. 
Unlike Britain, the US was not forced to leave the gold standard but chose to do so. The 
performance of the Gold Bloc, headed by France, was increasingly dismal and in 1936 
France too abandoned gold. 
Devalued currencies gave exports a competitive edge which trade rivals remaining on gold 
sought to blunt by the imposition of tariffs, quotas and bi-lateral trade agreements 
(Eichengreen and Irwin, 2009). In Nazi Germany, a drive for greater self-sufficiency was 
added to strict exchange controls and these policies were accompanied by a reliance on 
bilateral rather than multilateral trade (Obstfeld and Taylor, 1998.) Japan and Italy also 
provide examples of autarkic imperialism. Liberal internationalism was no more. Individual 
countries, or groups, strove to minimise their imports and maximise their exports. Trade 
restrictions increased dramatically during the 1930s but even when there was some 
relaxation it was not multinational. With the Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (1934), the 
US Congress authorised the President to negotiate bilateral tariff reductions with other 
countries. By 1939 the US had signed twenty treaties with countries accounting for 60 per 
cent of its trade (Findlay and O’Rourke, 2007). Unfortunately, during the 1930s, multilateral 
trade gave way to bilateral arrangements as trading within blocs, of which Imperial 
Preference was one, grew more common. The outcome was trade diversion rather than 
creation. 
(d) The Post Gold Standard World 
17 

========19========

Roosevelt promised the American people ‘bold persistent experimentation’ and, although 
scholars see in the New Deal continuity with America’s past, the public saw decisive action 
and lots of it. Immediately on entering office the new President addressed the banking 
problem. A Bank Holiday closed all the nation’s banks and the President assured the public 
that they would only be permitted to re-open when an independent examination had 
declared them sound. Roosevelt’s assurances and a raft of new regulations designed to curb 
the failings which Congress believed had helped to cause the depression, ushered in a 
period of banking stability. FDR’s decision to leave the gold standard and significantly 
devalue the dollar horrified conservatives but banished the need for the Fed to impose 
deflationary policies on a stricken economy. Indeed, after devaluation, the US became a safe 
haven for gold, especially from a troubled Europe. The gold flows generated an expansion of 
the money supply which helped to stimulate recovery. 
From the exceptionally low base of 1933, real GDP grew rapidly at an average of over 8 per 
cent a year until 1937.After a check, growth between 1938 and 1941 was, at over 10 per 
cent, even more rapid. Between 1929 and 1933 real GDP fell by 27 percent; between 1933 
and 1937 it rose by 36 per cent (Table 2). In 1937, the best year of the decade, output had 
just reached 1929 levels and there were as many people at work as there had been in the 
prosperous year of 1929. Unfortunately the labour force had grown by 6 m. and the 
unemployment rate, at 14.3 per cent, remained unacceptably high. Private investment 
failed to revive satisfactorily. Total gross private domestic investment (current $) rose from 
$1.4b in 1933 to $11.8b in 1937. The figure for 1929 was $16.2b. The recession of 1937-38 
was a sudden and devastating blow to an economy functioning far below full capacity. 
Private investment was driven down to $6.5b and full recovery was held back for several 
years. The economy did not reach its long run trend until June 1942. 
The New Deal is difficult to evaluate economically, partly because of its lack of consistency 
(Fishback, 2007). In the first New Deal, 1933-35, Roosevelt attacked the surpluses which 
many commentators believed had dragged the economy down. Farmers were paid to 
reduce the acreage on which they grew specified crops in the hope that reduced output 
would increase farm income and, indeed, revive the entire economy. The National Industrial 
Recovery Act (NIRA) encouraged cooperating businesses to curb competition, which was 
seen as potentially destabilising as it led to price reductions. Minimum wages and maximum 
18 

========20========

hours were supposed to increase consumer spending power and help spread the available 
work. It was a misguided attempt to regenerate the economy by producing less. This 
bureaucratic nightmare was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court in 1935. 
FDR now abandoned the attempt to cooperate with business and advocated a more 
competitive society. He denounced the ‘economic royalists’ who, he maintained, were 
trying to thwart the will of the people by undermining his policies. In order to protect the 
vulnerable, who would be exposed to exploitation in this new competitive environment, the 
formation and growth of trades unions was promoted by the Labor Relations Act (1935), 
more popularly known as the Wagner Act. Roosevelt gained a stunning re-election victory in 
1936 but by the following year the 1937-38 recession necessitated another change in 
direction. FDR, who had always disliked budget deficits, now came to accept that spending 
was a vital tool for recovery. Extra spending did bring about a revival. 
The President’s frequent changes of direction are seen by his opponents as cynicism. His 
supporters praise him for pragmatism. It is hard to think of the twists and turns of New Deal 
policies having a uniformly positive effect on economic performance. On the positive side, 
the achievement of bank stability was an important plus but Roosevelt’s poor relations with 
business and the administration’s inclination to balance increases in spending with new 
taxes did not create a favourable environment for private investment to flourish and 
negated the expansionary effects of federal spending. 
The New Deal was not Keynesian. Neither fiscal nor monetary policy was used as a tool for 
economic revival. The reaction of many contemporaries to the problem of unemployment, 
for example, was to promote polices that would share work, promote high wages to aid 
purchasing power, remove married women from the workforce and to institute a 
compulsory age of retirement. Although the federal budget was in deficit for every year 
during Roosevelt’s Presidency, these deficits were too small and unplanned to be described 
as Keynesian (Fishback, 2010). The growing money stock did exert a positive influence but 
its cause was the substantial flow of gold entering the banking system from troubled Europe 
rather than direct policy action by the Fed (Romer, 1992). The inflow also imposed costs as 
it provided advantages. The Fed became concerned at the potentially inflationary excess 
reserves held by member banks and in 1936 and 1937 raised reserve requirements. The 
19 

========21========

banks responded by reducing their lending. Coincident with this restriction, federal spending 
was reduced. The combination of restrictive monetary and fiscal policies plunged the 
economy into a serious yearlong downturn during which real GDP fell by 10 per cent and 
unemployment rose to 12.5 per cent. Fortunately, the recession bottomed out in May 1938 
as both fiscal and monetary policy became expansionary. Recovery was rapid but prices 
continued to fall for another two years. This recession was a serious self-induced wound. 
(e) Unemployment 
Hatton and Thomas (2010) offer an explanation for the mass unemployment in both the US 
and the UK during the 1930s. Unemployment in the UK during the thirties was similar to 
that of the 1920s. It was concentrated in the regions where the old staple industries, cotton 
textiles, coal mining, ship building and iron and steel industries dominated. However, in 
other parts of the country, a private housing boom, encouraged by low interest rates and 
rising real wages, created many jobs and there was employment growth too in the 
manufacture of consumer durables and in the service sector. By the mid 1930s, UK 
unemployment was primarily regional and structural. 
In contrast, the US had enjoyed low unemployment during the 1920s. The stubborn refusal 
of unemployment to decline to pre depression levels as economic recovery got underway 
ensured that expenditure on relief was a new and a major item in the federal budget. There 
were other differences between the twenties and the thirties. The Roosevelt administration 
encouraged the growth of trades unions and in the first New Deal, minimum wages and 
maximum hours raised both real wages and labour costs. Indeed, the support of both 
Hoover and Roosevelt for polices designed prevent wage rates from falling helps to explain 
the extraordinary growth in money wages during a period of mass unemployment. The 
employed benefited but real wages increased above market clearing levels and, as a result, 
unemployment persisted. 
Unlike British policy makers, the New Dealers were totally opposed to ‘dole’ payments, 
which they feared would lead to a dependency culture. Instead they stressed the benefits of 
work relief with a cash wage and hourly wage rates identical to those in the private sector. 
Hours worked were restricted so that take home pay was not so munificent that private 
sector work would be rejected if it was offered. Unfortunately, limited funding enabled only 
20 

========22========

40 per cent of workers eligible for work project placements to find employment on them. 
Rejected applicants were forced to accept relief from their counties, which was far less 
generous than that provided by Washington. 
Mass unemployment was a worldwide phenomenon during the depression. Sweden, 
Denmark and Norway, like Britain, endured double digit unemployment in both the twenties 
and the thirties (Feinstein et al, 1997). In Germany, the deflationary policies pursued even 
after the gold standard had been abandoned led to an unemployment total of 6.0m. In 
1933, roughly double that of the UK. The social and political distress in Germany, which 
played a significant part in the election of Hitler as Chancellor in 1933, was widely seen at 
the time as one of the unacceptable costs of unemployment. The eradication of 
unemployment was a Nazi priority and the new government acted swiftly by imposing a 
“new deal” on Germany which was radically different than Roosevelt’s model. The Nazis 
abolished German trades unions and with them collective bargaining. A mass programme of 
public works financed by budget deficits was begun immediately. Industrial recovery 
emphasised the production of capital goods not consumer goods. Labour service, and the 
introduction of military conscription in 1935, helped to reduce the ranks of the jobless so 
that in 1937, unemployment had been reduced to less than 2.0m. A striking feature of the 
labour market was the very modest growth in real wages which this totalitarian regime was 
able to control. When the market became tight and shortages appeared, there were no 
trades unions to help workers exploit their scarcity. 
The contribution of Nazi work-creation schemes and the state’s ability to control wage 
growth explains why the decline of unemployment in Germany appeared a success story 
when compared to Roosevelt’s efforts in the US (Temin, 1989). Depressed commentators in 
the free world wondered if the only way to eradicate unemployment was to embrace the 
policies of either Nazi Germany, or the Soviet Union. Neither option had great appeal. It 
was, however, preparation for war which sheltered Britain, France and Germany from 
sharing the US experience during 1937-38. Expansionary fiscal policies sustained the 
European economies as they geared up for conflict and minimised the effects of this 
contraction. 
3. Analysis 
21 

========23========

(a) What Caused the Downturn? 
Economic historians have traditionally viewed the large falls in real GDP that happened in 
the Great Depression as the result of large aggregate demand shocks. We think this is still appropriate and will identify the main sources of these shocks.1 However, the translation of 
adverse shifts in aggregate demand into an impact on output as well as the price level 
implies that the aggregate supply curve was non-vertical and the reasons for this need to be 
explored. Moreover, it is now generally accepted that the shocks which started the 
downward spiral were greatly amplified by the financial crises which characterized the early 
1930s. A further key aspect of the Great Depression is that recessionary impulses were not 
immediately countered by an effective policy response and this also has to be explained. 
Here a central role was played by the gold standard, the fixed exchange rate system, of 
which all the major economies were members at the end of the 1920s. 
The most important source of shocks to the world economy from the late 1920s onwards 
was the United States. This was not only because the collapse in output in the world’s 
largest economy was spectacular but because other countries responded to deflationary 
changes in American monetary policy notably at the end of the 1920s (Eichengreen, 2004). 
At least since Friedman and Schwartz (1963), monetary policy errors have been blamed by 
many economists; the M1 measure of the money supply fell by over 25 per cent between 
1929 and 1933 and it is generally agreed that, notwithstanding the constraints of the gold 
standard, at least through early 1932, there was scope for the Federal Reserve to reverse 
this decline by an aggressive response. Instead, adhering to the real bills doctrine, it was 
believed that monetary policy was loose and expansionary policy was inappropriate, even 
though real interest rates were very high. More details can be found in the paper by 
Fishback (2010). 
1 
Until relatively recently this was also commonplace among macroeconomists even those of a strong neoclassical persuasion. Since Cole and Ohanian (1999) there have been attempts to explain the Great Depression in a real business cycle (RBC) framework. This would naturally look to adverse TFP shocks as the recessionary impulse; in common with most economic historians, for example, Pensieroso (2007) and Temin (2008), we do not believe that this venture has been successful. The strong point of RBC modelling of the 1930s has been to point out and seek to quantify impacts of the New Deal on aggregate supply during the recovery phase (Cole and Ohanian, 2004). Indeed, in that tradition the term ‘Great Depression’ is applied to the whole of the 1930s for the United States on the grounds that, despite quite a strong recovery after 1933, real GDP remained well below what would have been predicted on the basis of 1920s trend growth. 
22 

========24========

Econometric analysis has supported the view that declines in the money supply tended to 
have negative effects on real output in the United States in the interwar period; however, 
the decline in output in the early 1930s was much bigger than would be predicted simply on 
the basis of the fall in M1 (Gordon and Wilcox, 1981). This might imply that there were 
other demand shocks working through autonomous falls in consumption and investment 
spending, as argued by Temin (1976). A major additional factor was the spate of banking 
crises that engulfed the United States in the early 1930s when more than 9000 banks failed 
(comprising about a seventh of total deposits). 
In a seminal paper, Bernanke (1983) found that adding changes in deposits of failing banks 
to an equation to predict output based on money and price shocks substantially improved 
its predictive power. This should not be surprising since it is well known that systemic 
banking crises tend to be associated with large output losses (Laeven and Valencia, 2008). 
Bernanke interpreted his result as an indication that bank failures implied a loss of services 
of financial intermediation, a ‘credit crunch’, in which output fell consequent on an adverse 
shift in the supply of loans. This claim, based on correlations at the macro level, has 
subsequently been strongly supported by micro-level research into bank behaviour 
(Calomiris and Mason, 2003a; Calomiris and Wilson, 2004). So bank failures were an 
important channel for the transmission of monetary impulses to real-economy outcomes. 
Friedman and Schwartz (1963) interpreted the bank failures as primarily a result of a 
‘scramble for liquidity’ with the implication that, if the Federal Reserve had acted as a 
vigorous lender of last resort, they could largely have been averted at least in 1930 and 
1931. Bordo and Lane (2010) provide support for this view based on an econometric 
analysis using examiners’ reports on failed banks. That said, it is clear that the United States 
entered the 1930s with a weak financial system, under-capitalized and based on unit rather 
than branch banking, and that the probability that a bank would fail strongly reflected 
fundamentals and insolvency stemming from ex-ante balance-sheet weakness rather than 
panic (Calomiris and Mason, 2003b). It is also clear that high failure rates reflected 
weaknesses in regulation, notably in terms of capital adequacy, and prudential supervision, 
in particular because of inadequate standards at the state level; indeed, Mitchener (2007) 
estimated that the bank failure rate might have been halved had regulatory and supervisory 
practices across states improved by 1 standard deviation. 
23 

========25========

Obviously, a more resilient banking system would have coped better with the stress created 
by macroeconomic problems. The incorporation of a financial sector into a DSGE model of 
the interwar American economy gives similar insights. Christiano et al. (2003) found that 
shocks that raise liquidity preference (reduce bank deposits relative to currency holdings) 
lower funds for investment and contribute to a non-neutral debt deflation but that a 
monetary policy rule that responded to these money demand shocks could have limited the 
fall in real GDP in the early 1930s to only about 6 per cent. 
Where does the Wall Street Crash fit into this story? To the person in the street, the 
collapse of stock market prices is surely the iconic aspect of the Great Depression. The Dow- 
Jones industrial index fell from 381 to 198 between the peak in early September and mid- November 1929 while from peak to the trough in 1932 about 5/6th was wiped off stock 
market values. The crash in the autumn of 1929 included the infamous Black Thursday and 
Black Tuesday (October 24 and 29). In contrast, economists and economic historians have 
generally thought that the Wall Street Crash played at most a minor role in the downturn. In 
part, this is because the fundamental value of a share reflects the discounted present value 
of future earnings and is thus an endogenous variable. That said, share price indices exhibit 
‘excess volatility’ – they jump about much more than can be explained by an efficient 
markets hypothesis (Shiller, 2003) – and probably were quite a bit ‘too high’ ex-ante in 1929.2 So there is scope to think in terms of an exogenous shock to share prices. The 
question then is how much effect might this have had on the real economy. The answer is 
probably a small impact on consumption through wealth effects and postponement of 
durables as a response to increased uncertainty (Romer, 1990). There is good evidence that 
increases in uncertainty affected investment quite significantly through increased risk 
premia but, that said, this does not seem to result from discrete events like the stock market 
crash (Ferderer and Zalewski, 1994). So, overall, the impact of the Wall Street Crash on the 
real American economy was very modest in comparison with that of monetary policy and 
banking crises. 
2 
Whether there was a ‘bubble’ in the 1929 stock market has been controversial. The most persuasive evidence that there was a substantial bubble comes from the pricing of loans to stock brokers and the valuation of closed-end mutual funds; see Rappoport and White (1993) and De Long and Shleifer (1991). 
24 

========26========

In sum, the collapse in economic activity was the result of large shocks, both monetary and 
IS, to aggregate demand interacting with a fragile financial system so as to magnify the 
impact. Discretionary policy responses were, at best, too little, too late while automatic 
stabilizers were very weak in an economy with a small federal budget together with low tax 
rates and transfer payments. Although nominal interest rates fell by several percentage 
points, ex post real interest rates rose steeply while bank failures and declining asset prices 
delivered a credit crunch. 
For the typical small open economy in the rest of the world, the big problem as the 
Depression took hold was being subjected to deflationary pressure as world output and 
prices fell whilst being severely constrained in making by membership of the gold standard. 
The concept of the macroeconomic trilemma tells us that such a country can only have two 
of a fixed exchange rate, capital mobility and an independent monetary policy. This last was 
typically given up while the gold standard prevailed, although in the globalization backlash 
that ensued capital controls were very widely adopted. It follows that a monetary-policy 
response to the deflationary shocks needed to be coordinated across countries (thereby 
allowing interest rate differentials to remain unchanged) but, as Wolf (2010) explains, 
international coordination was out of the question. Indeed, non-cooperative behaviour was 
the order of the day epitomized by France’s accumulation and sterilization of gold reserves. 
Besides having no control over monetary policy, staying on the gold standard required 
reductions in prices and money wages and entailed high real interest rates and increased 
the risk of a banking crisis as balance sheets deteriorated. The decision not to leave the gold 
standard was influenced by the strength of worries about loss of monetary discipline and 
the degree of pain in terms of price falls and devaluations by important trading partners 
(Wolf, 2008). Banking crises were experienced in many countries and were associated with 
weaknesses in banking systems as well as the deflationary pressures which stressed them 
(Grossman and Meissner, 2010). Banking crises were bad for the real economy and 
countries which went through them were exposed to much larger decreases in real output 
(Bernanke and James, 1991). 
It is implicit in this discussion that the aggregate supply curve is positively sloped rather than 
vertical so that aggregate demand shocks have output as well as price-level effects. This 
25 

========27========

seems to be borne out by the evidence. Bernanke and Carey (1996) in a careful panel-data 
econometric study found both that there was an inverse relationship between real wages 
and output and that this reflected incomplete (and indeed quite sticky) nominal wage 
adjustment in the presence of aggregate demand shocks. It is not fully understood why 
wages were so sticky but ‘new-Keynesian’ arguments may be relevant. In particular, there is 
evidence to support an ‘insider-outsider’ explanation. Consistent with this, for the United 
States, it has been shown that the delay in nominal wage cuts was most pronounced in 
industries where there was market power (Hanes, 2000). However, the impact of President 
Hoover’s attempts to persuade employers to agree not to cut wages may have also delayed 
wage cuts (O’Brien, 1989).3 
The volume of international trade fell dramatically during the Great Depression, both 
absolutely and relative to GDP, and the period is notable for a surge in protectionism 
following the Smoot-Hawley Tariff imposed by the United States in 1930. For the advanced 
countries, real GDP fell by 16.7 per cent between 1929 and 1932 but import volumes fell by 
23.5 per cent (Table 1). Grossman and Meissner (2010) review the reasons for the decline in 
trade in some detail. Obviously a major factor is the fall in world incomes but increasing 
barriers to trade clearly played a very significant role; although estimates of their 
contribution are sensitive to methodology, it seems likely to have been at least 40 per cent, 
as estimated by Madsen (2001). 
The goals of protectionist policies were typically to safeguard employment, to improve the 
balance of payments and to raise prices. Unlike today, there were no constraints from WTO 
membership. Protectionism is usually thought of as the triumph of special-interest groups 
but, in this period, it may be more a substitute for a macroeconomic-policy response. For 
example, Eichengreen and Irwin (2009) found that, on average, tariffs were higher in 
countries that stayed on gold longer. It seems unlikely that protection generally had any 
major impact on GDP during the downturn because with retaliation there were offsetting 
effects on imports and exports. Eichengreen (1989) estimated that Smoot-Hawley raised 
3 
Bordo et al. (2000) constructed a DSGE model incorporating overlapping Taylor-wage contracts and found that sluggish wage adjustment could have been a powerful aspect of the transmission mechanism from monetary shocks to real output effects. 
26 

========28========

American GDP in the short run by about 1.6 per cent after allowing for retaliation and 
effects on income in the rest of the world. 
(b) What Drove the Recovery? 
The decline in economic activity across the world came to an end in 1932/3, although there 
were substantial output gaps for a long time afterwards. Changes in economic policy played 
a major role in promoting economic recovery on the demand side and to some extent by 
inhibiting it on the supply side. In the United States, the inauguration of the Roosevelt 
administration in 1933 ushered in the New Deal and most countries left the gold standard 
and embarked on a new macroeconomic policy regime. There is a large literature that seeks 
to account for the role of policy in macroeconomic outcomes in the post-Depression years 
but, as this section will show, there remains room for debate. 
In the United States recovery after 1933 can be characterized as strong but incomplete. In 
the four years 1933 to 1937, real GDP rose by 36 per cent compared with a fall of 27 per 
cent in the previous four years taking the level in 1937 back to about 5 per cent above that 
of 1929. Assuming trend growth at the pre-1929 rate, however, there was still an output 
gap of some 25 per cent. From 1933 the New Deal swung into action with its alphabet soup 
of public-spending initiatives. It is natural to assume that this represented a substantial 
Keynesian fiscal stimulus but, as has been known since the calculations of Brown (1956) and 
Peppers (1973), this was not the case. 
Fishback (2010) points out that the New Deal was largely financed by tax increases and 
notes that the direct effects of fiscal stimulus were at most a very small part of the recovery. 
The federal deficit in 1936 was about 5.5 per cent of GDP and between 1933 and 1936 the 
discretionary increase probably amounted to around half of this figure. So, fiscal policy was 
not really tried. Would it have worked? This turns on the value of the fiscal multiplier. In 
the circumstances of the mid-1930s with interest rates at or near the lower bound, there 
are good reasons to believe that for temporary government spending increases fiscal 
multipliers should be a good deal higher with much less crowding out than in normal times 
(Hall, 2009). Gordon and Krenn (2010) provide estimates of the fiscal multiplier based on a 
VAR analysis of the impact of government expenditure on preparations for World War II in 
1940/1 which are 1.8 in 1940 falling to 0.8 by end 1941. However, as Fishback (2010) 
27 

========29========

notes, there are few estimates of the fiscal multiplier during the New Deal but his own 
research at the state level suggests a range of 0.9 to 1.7 – perhaps a bit below Hall’s best 
guess of 1.7 for similar conditions. In any event, this would make dealing with the output 
gap of 1933 a daunting task. 
The New Deal was a package of measures some of which, notably the National Industrial 
Recovery Act of 1933 and later the National Labor Relations Act, were intended to increase 
the bargaining power of workers vis-a-vis employers and to prevent nominal wage declines. 
Cole and Ohanian (2004) in the RBC tradition argue that the effect was to raise real wages 
and unemployment compared with competitive market outcomes and that this accounts for 
a significant part of the shortfall of output in 1937 relative to the pre-1929 trend. Hatton 
and Thomas (2010) review the evidence for this claim and conclude that the New Deal may 
well have raised the equilibrium level of unemployment considerably; they find that the 
NAIRU was 12 percentage points higher in the American economy in the 1930s compared 
with the 1920s. So, it seems that the adverse supply-side impact of the New Deal probably 
outweighs any positive demand stimulus that it delivered. 
Romer (1992) argued that the main stimulus to recovery in the United States was monetary 
policy, noting very rapid growth in the monetary base and M1 after 1933. This was driven 
by (largely-unsterilized) gold inflows after the United States left the gold standard. M1 grew 
at nearly 10 per cent per year between 1933 and 1937 and Romer estimated that this was 
sufficient to raise real GDP in 1937 by about 25 per cent compared with what would have 
happened under normal monetary growth. She found a large reduction in real interest rates 
from 1933 and concluded that this had favourable impacts on investment spending. By 
implication, the positive effect of monetary policy on nominal GDP was a major reason why 
the federal debt to GDP ratio only went up from 16 per cent in 1929 to 44 per cent in 1939. 
This account needs to be supplemented by explicitly considering how the United States 
escaped the liquidity trap, i.e., delivered monetary stimulus despite interest rates at the 
lower bound. The key here was ‘regime change’, as was originally stressed by Temin and 
Wigmore (1990). They argue that leaving the gold standard was a clear signal that the 
deflationary period was over. Eggertson (2008), working with a standard DSGE model, built 
on this and provided some quantification. His argument is that Roosevelt’s actions on 
28 

========30========

taking office, comprising leaving gold, announcing an objective of restoring the prices to 
pre-Depression levels, and implementing New Deal spending amounted to a credible policy 
that delivered a major change in inflationary expectations which drove down real interest 
rates, matching the classic recipe for escape from the liquidity trap (Svensson, 2003). 
Eggertson’s calibration implied that the regime change accounted for about three-quarters 
of the recovery in output between 1933 and 1937. Interestingly, this kind of model makes 
the New Deal a major factor in promoting recovery but through its indirect effects in 
changing expectations rather through a Keynesian fiscal stimulus. 
An important ingredient in recovery in the United States was rehabilitation of the banking 
system to put an end to the waves of bank failures and to ease the credit crunch; this was 
indeed a major priority for legislators. Both re-capitalization and re-regulation of the banks 
were required. Following a compulsory closure of all banks for three days for inspection of 
their books, the Roosevelt Administration passed an Emergency Banking Act in March 1933 
and this was followed by the Banking Acts of 1933 (Glass-Steagall) and of 1935. About 4000 
banks were declared insolvent and not allowed to re-open after the ‘bank holiday’. Inter 
alia, these banking acts empowered the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), a 
government agency, to buy preferred stock in banks with voting rights that frequently 
entailed effective control, introduced federal deposit insurance, separated investment from 
commercial banking, and imposed interest-rate ceilings on bank accounts (regulation Q). 
However, nationwide branch banking continued to be prohibited. 
This approach was successful in part, as Mitchener and Mason (2010) discuss. Deposit 
insurance, made permanent under the auspices of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC), was important in ending the threat of further bank runs, as theory 
suggests it should (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). The RFC provided substantial capital; by 
March 1934 it owned stock in nearly half of all commercial banks and in June 1935 it owned 
more than a third of the capital ($1.3 billion in 6800 banks) of the American banking system 
(Olson, 1988). The RFC imposed conditions on banks which were a good substitute for 
market discipline on risk taking (Calomiris and Mason, 2003c) and the RFC made money for 
the American taxpayer. Bank runs ceased and failures returned to normal low levels; the 
deposits-to-currency ratio which had fallen from 10.9 to 5.1 between 1929 and 1933 went 
back above 7. Bank lending, however, remained far below pre-Depression levels and 
29 

========31========

deposit-to-reserve ratios continued to fall from 13.0 in 1929 to 8.2 in 1933 to 5.0 in 1937, 
when loans were a little over half but bank capital was over 80 per cent of the 1929 level. 
This reflected continued efforts by banks to reduce default risk at a time when they found it 
costly to raise new equity (Calomiris and Wilson, 2004). 
The regulatory response to the banking crises, captured by political interest groups intent 
on preserving unit banking and imbued with the ideology of the real bills doctrine, was highly unsatisfactory (Calomiris, 2010).4 Calomiris notes that the legislation was designed to 
support unit banking yet this was the main structural weakness of the system which 
inhibited diversification of risks, prevented co-ordinated responses to shocks, restricted 
competition, and was a major source of banking instability. In contrast, the Glass-Steagall 
Act mandated the separation of commercial and investment banking whereas the evidence 
is that banks which did both were better diversified and less likely to fail (White, 1986) and 
that there were no good investor-protection reasons for this legislation (Kroszner and Rajan, 
1994). In the longer term, the downside of deposit insurance in terms of encouragement of 
greater risk taking was an important concern but politically it was impossible to remove; this 
might be seen as a significant cost of the ineffectiveness of the Federal Reserve as lender of 
last resort. 
A key issue with macroeconomic policies to promote recovery is when to withdraw 
monetary and fiscal stimulus and revert to normal bank policy: too soon and a double-dip 
recession ensues, too late and inflation takes off. These ‘exit-strategy’ issues are considered 
by Mitchener and Mason (2010). For the United States, the former problem materialized in 
1937/8 when there was a short but severe recession in which real GDP fell by 10 per cent 
from peak to trough. This seems to have been consequent on a combination of monetary 
and fiscal policy tightening in which the former was probably more important (Velde, 2009). 
This entailed a doubling of banks’ reserve requirements between August 1936 and May 
1937, motivated by fear that excess reserves held by the banks might lead to a rapid rise in 
bank lending, together with the adoption of a policy to sterilize gold inflows as a result of 
which M1 growth stalled, and tax increases which saw the full-employment surplus rise by 
4 
The real bills doctrine held that the Federal Reserve should simply supply credit to meet the needs of trade and should not seek to target monetary growth or inflation; adherents believed in the separation of investment and commercial banking. 
30 

========32========

about 3.4 per cent of GDP (Peppers, 1973), motivated by moves to re-balance the federal 
budget in the face of increases in the public debt to GDP ratio. 
For countries in the rest of the world, a key factor in recovery was exit from the gold 
standard, as would be expected on the basis of the earlier discussion. On average, the 
earlier this happened the shallower was the downturn and the sooner recovery began, as 
was first shown in a very influential paper by Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) and has 
subsequently been confirmed for wider samples of advanced and middle income countries 
by Bernanke (1995) and Campa (1990). Bernanke (1995) points to leaving gold as permitting 
monetary expansion and leading to big declines in real interest rates. 
In principle, going off gold also allowed countries with balance of payments deficits to 
escape from the deflationary pressures on fiscal policy that, with sterilization of monetary 
inflows in surplus economies, bore heavily as they tried to prevent a currency crisis 
(Eichengreen and Temin, 2010). This might have allowed temporary fiscal stimulus to 
promote recovery but, as Wolf (2010) explains, for a variety of reasons including continued 
fear of inflation, many countries were reluctant to follow this path in the first half of the 
1930s. Would the injection of fiscal stimulus have been successful? Almunia et al. (2010) 
obtain results that suggest it might well have been, given near liquidity trap conditions, and 
believe that there were positive results based on sizeable multipliers where it was employed 
as in late-1930s France and Italy. 
In similar vein, it should be noted that sovereign default was good for relatively rapid and 
strong recovery (Eichengreen and Portes, 1990). Continuing to service debt as nominal GDP 
fell implied severe fiscal austerity and, not surprisingly, default was widespread both in 
Europe and Latin America in an era when the creditors were typically private bondholders, 
rather than banks, and creditor governments took a relatively relaxed attitude.5 
These themes can be further illustrated by considering economic recovery in the UK which is 
covered in some detail in Middleton (2010). Compared with the United States, the UK 
experienced a relatively mild downturn with real GDP falling by only about 5 per cent and an 
5 
Eichengreen and Portes (1990) list 12 ‘heavy’ and 16 ‘light’ sovereign defaulters; the former include Germany and Greece and the latter include Canada, France, Italy and Spain 
31 

========33========

early recovery with real GDP returning to the 1929 level by 1934.6 This fits the picture. The 
UK had a concentrated banking system but no universal banking and there were no bank 
failures. An early exit from the gold standard in September 1931 was a blessing in disguise 
and the result of a currency crisis driven by the fear that rising unemployment in an 
economy hard hit by falling exports was incompatible with continuation of deflationary 
policies (Eichengreen and Jeanne, 1998). Devaluation permitted a ‘cheap-money’ policy 
together with a significant gain in competitiveness and this accounts for much of the early 
recovery which started in a period of fiscal consolidation (Broadberry, 1986). The UK did not 
default but in 1932 achieved a significant reduction in debt interest payments through 
conversion of a large war loan into lower-interest bonds. Unlike the United States, fiscal 
policy eventually played a significant part through the rearmament programme associated 
with a discretionary fiscal stimulus of about 3 per cent of GDP between 1935 and 1938; the 
evidence suggests a short-run fiscal multiplier around 1.5 (Dimsdale and Horsewood, 1995; 
Thomas, 1983). 
(c) What Were the Long-Term Implications of the Great Depression? 
The Great Depression had long-lasting effects on economic policy and performance. In the 
UK it can be seen as a major step down ‘the road to 1945’ and the favourable reception in 
the 1940s and 1950s to the ideas of Beveridge and Keynes, while in the United States there 
is a widely-held belief that it was the ‘defining moment’ in the development of the American 
economy (Bordo et al., 1998). Obviously, there is a danger of attributing to the Depression 
changes which would have come about anyway but there is no doubt that the failures of the 
market economy in the 1930s were game-changing. 
Clearly, one implication was a major re-thinking of macroeconomics by the economics 
profession which in the Anglo-American world rapidly adopted Keynesian thinking. This had 
implications for policymaking, although these need to be handled with care. In the United 
States, the main change was that it became generally accepted that the automatic 
stabilizers would not be over-ridden in pursuit of a balanced budget and these were now 
6 
This raises the question as to why British folklore thinks the 1930s were so bad. The answer probably relates to regional trends in unemployment. In particular, adjustment to declines in the export-staple industries concentrated in ‘Outer Britain’ proved very difficult, cf. Hatton and Thomas (2010). This is symbolized by the Jarrow March, which took its participants in 1936 from the depressed North East to the prosperous South East. 
32 

========34========

much more powerful with federal spending considerably bigger, but there was no move to 
trying to fine-tune the economy through Keynesian demand management (De Long, 1998). 
In the UK, after the war, activist government intervention to prevent shortfalls of aggregate 
demand did become the norm and by the 1950s and 1960s short-term demand 
management was very prominent in a way that would have been unthinkable in the early 
1930s.7 
There was also a legacy from the 1930s for the framework of macroeconomic policy in 
terms of the macroeconomic trilemma. The move to controls on international capital 
movements proved to be long-lasting; in most countries, they continued throughout the 
Bretton-Woods period with the return to pegged exchange rates and freer international 
trade. These years were characterized by very small current-account positions, very high 
correlations of domestic savings and investment, and the insulation of domestic from 
foreign interest rates, thus allowing independent monetary policy (Obstfeld and Taylor, 
2004). This has been portrayed by Rodrik (2002) as the ‘Bretton-Woods Compromise’ in 
terms of the acceptable limits on globalization required by domestic politics at the level of 
the nation state after the debacle of the 1930s. 
The crisis of the 1930s surely also contributed to the massive increase in social transfers that 
characterized the OECD countries in the 50 years from 1930 to 1980 during which time the 
median percentage of GDP rose from a strikingly low 1.66 to 20.09 per cent (Lindert, 2004). 
Here too, the story should not be over-simplified – many other factors played a role 
including population ageing, trends in income distributions and rising prosperity. 
Nevertheless, the ‘defining moment’ hypothesis for the United States is perhaps at its most 
persuasive in terms of federal social-insurance schemes; Wallis (2010) sees a fundamental 
change in terms of fiscal federalism as the New Deal succeeded in putting rules in place that 
underpinned the political acceptability of inter-state transfers. 
The Great Depression also had big implications for microeconomic policy; Hannah and 
Temin (2010) suggest that the immediate impact can be seen as a serious retreat from the 
7 
The initial stance of the Labour government in the late 1940s was to embrace planning rather than fine- tuning. It should also be noted that there has been a vigorous debate among economic historians about the validity of the concept of a ‘Keynesian revolution’ in British economic policymaking; see Booth (2001) for an introduction and further references. 
33 

========35========

capitalist free market with a new emphasis on government interventions to correct market 
failures. This implies a greater role for regulation and, in most OECD countries, for state 
ownership. The short-term implication was undoubtedly a substantial reduction in the 
extent of competition in product markets, including the rise of cartels encouraged by 
government and the anti-competitive effects of protectionism. The weakening of 
competition turned out to be much more pervasive and long-lasting in the UK than in the 
United States (Broadberry and Crafts, 1992; Shepherd, 1981). 
It is well-known that financial crises can have permanent adverse effects on the level and 
possibly also the trend growth rate of potential output and this is a major reason why such 
crises usually have serious fiscal implications including big increases in structural deficits as a 
percentage of GDP. Thinking in terms of a production function, there will be direct adverse 
effects on the amount of capital as investment is interrupted, on the amount of labour 
inputs through hysteresis effects and on TFP if R & D is cut back. Indirect effects – either 
positive or negative - may also be felt depending on the impact the crisis has on supply-side 
policy. Furceri and Mourougane (2009) estimate that for OECD countries a severe banking 
crisis reduces the level of potential output by about 4 per cent while the review of the 
evidence in IMF (2009) which covers lower-income economies suggests 10 per cent; in 
neither case is long-run trend growth thought to be affected. 
What does the experience of the United States in the 1930s reveal? One way to address the 
issue is through time-series econometrics where the shock in the 1930s has been a focal point in debates about deterministic or stochastic trends.8 Here the evidence is rather 
inconclusive and the picture is muddied by World War II. In fact, assuming trend-stationarity 
and extrapolating the pre-1929 trend of per capita income growth into the long run gives 
quite a good approximation to actual experience, but a more careful look suggests a break 
in trend in 1929 comprising a levels decrease followed by a modest increase in trend growth 
through 1955 (Ben-David et al., 2003). The pre-1929 trend line was crossed in 1942. 
More insight may be obtained by considering business-cycle peak-to-peak growth- 
accounting estimates, as in Table 3. The obvious feature of the 1930s is that the financial 
8 
With a stochastic trend, a shock only has a temporary effect and the economy then returns to the previous trend growth path; in contrast, if the trend is a non-stationary stochastic process, shocks have an enduring effect on the future growth path and long-run forecasts are affected by historical events. 
34 

========36========

crisis undermined growth in the capital stock. Had growth of the capital stock continued at 
the pre-1929 rate, by 1941 it would have been about 35 per cent larger and, accordingly, 
potential GDP perhaps 12 per cent bigger. Growth of labour inputs was sluggish, impaired 
by the impact of the New Deal. However, TFP growth was very strong, powered by 
sustained R & D, and Field (2003) labelled the 1930s the most technologically progressive 
decade of the twentieth century in the United States. This theme is pursued in Hannah and 
Temin (2010). 
A legacy of the depression was a large rise in the number of long-term unemployed workers 
and the share of unemployment which was long-term. In the UK this was to a large extent 
the result of job losses in the traditional export industries interacting with the 
unemployment-insurance system to generate a group of workers who would have liked 
their old jobs back but could survive on the dole. These long-term unemployed workers 
seem to have experienced declining re-employment probabilities over time as they became 
discouraged, their human capital deteriorated, and employers regarded them as damaged 
goods (Crafts, 1987). The plight of these workers scarred the period and, virtually excluded 
from the labour market, they did not hold down wage pressures (Crafts, 1989). So, at any 
level of unemployment, wage pressure was greater than in the 1920s or, equivalently, 
hysteresis effects had raised the NAIRU - perhaps by about 1.5 percentage points. 
The UK did not experience a banking crisis but its supply-side policy was greatly affected by 
the response to the shocks of the 1930s and the damage limitation of the period had 
persistent effects well into the postwar period. Booth (1987) pointed to the logic of the so- 
called ‘managed-economy approach’ that was adopted, namely, that it cohered in terms of 
trying to promote an increase in prices relative to wages through a combination of 
devaluation, tariffs and cartels. This amounted to a big reduction in product-market 
competition which took a long time fully to reverse. In the late 1950s, tariffs were still at 
mid-1930s levels and about 60 per cent of manufacturing output was cartelized. The retreat 
from competition had adverse effects on productivity performance over several decades 
and provided the context in which industrial relations problems and sleepy management 
proliferated (Broadberry and Crafts, 2011). 
35 

========37========

Finally, it should be noted that international trade did not return to pre-Depression levels 
until well after World War II. As of the late 1930s, it looked as though the increase in trade 
costs in the 1930s had ‘permanently’ reduced trade [X + M] to income ratios by about 30 
per cent for the advanced countries. Using modern research on the impact of trade on the 
level of income which allows for impacts on capital stock and TFP (rather than welfare 
triangles), following in the tradition of Frankel and Romer (1999), suggests that the long 
term effect would have been to reduce the level of GDP per person by about 15 per cent.9 
4. What Are the Policy Lessons? 
This section pulls out the strongest policy lessons from the 1930s which have emerged from 
the above. Some of these are well-understood and, fortunately, in the Great Recession of 
the last two years many of the worst mistakes of 80 years ago have not been repeated. The 
economic history of the Great Depression is, of course, well-known to key players such as 
Ben Bernanke and Christina Romer who are distinguished contributors to the literature. We 
are, of course, aware that some things are different now, for example, there was no 
European Monetary Union or too-big-to-fail doctrine in the 1930s, and that policy decisions 
and outcomes were contingent on the circumstances of the time; nevertheless, we believe 
that there is value in re-visiting the experience of that decade. 
Starting with monetary and fiscal policy, the headlines from the American experience are 
clear enough. Monetary policy bears a big responsibility for the early-1930s slump; 
subsequent research has refined rather than refuted the claims of Friedman and Schwartz 
(1963). Monetary policy errors were both of commission and omission. Inappropriate 
tightening of policy precipitated the downturn while the subsequent failure to provide 
greater monetary stimulus allowed recession to develop into depression. In particular, as 
Bordo and Lane (2010) show, the Federal Reserve failed in its role as lender of last resort 
and thus made the financial crisis much more serious. These mistakes were not repeated in 
2008/9 when monetary policy was aggressively expansionary (Wheelock, 2010). 
9 
This is based on the point estimate of an elasticity of 0.5 for the effect of trade exposure on income found for the period 1960-95 by Feyrer (2009) using an improved estimation technique. As far as we know, a similar study has not yet been performed for the interwar years. For the pre-1914 period, Jacks (2006) found larger elasticities based on the original Frankel-Romer methodology. 
36 

========38========

In the 1930s recovery, by contrast, monetary growth provided a major impetus while there 
was virtually no fiscal stimulus, even though it is reasonable to suppose that the fiscal 
multiplier was quite big. It is important not to be misled by the frenetic activity of the New 
Deal; fiscal policy did not fail, rather it was not tried. It should also be recognized that a 
strong recovery was rudely interrupted by the severe recession of 1937/8 and this seems to 
be explained by deflationary moves in both monetary and fiscal policy. 
The British fiscal-policy experience offers rather different messages. In the rearmament 
phase of the later 1930s, fiscal stimulus had a substantial positive impact on real output. On 
the other hand, in the crisis at the start of the decade, attempts to prevent the budget 
deficit rising as the recession deepened reduced aggregate demand appreciably with the 
structural deficit being reduced by over 2.5 per cent of GDP (Middleton, 1985). The big 
difference compared with the present day is that the government attempted to over-ride the automatic stabilizers.10 The context, in terms of the very unpleasant budgetary 
arithmetic arising from wartime borrowing and being on the gold standard, is important.11 
This drastically reduced freedom to manoeuvre in the face of fears of an adverse reaction 
from financial markets and of deflation. The lessons here are that falling prices greatly 
magnify worries about fiscal sustainability and that, at times when fiscal policy is a valuable 
weapon, it is highly advantageous to enter the crisis with a history of fiscal prudence. 
The experience of the 1930s tells to expect that a legacy of the current crisis will be a 
substantial increase in long-term unemployment and economic inactivity. It seems clear 
that once again this will imply that the NAIRU goes up and the level of potential output goes 
down. The analysis in Guichard and Rusticelli (2010) suggests that the average increase in 
NAIRU through hysteresis effects both across the OECD as a whole and also in the UK could 
be around 0.75 percentage points. The adverse impact on the well-being of those who 
become long-term unemployed will be severe and sustained (Clark et al., 2008). As Hatton 
10 
The large UK budget deficit in 2009/10 of about 11 per cent of GDP mainly results from the fiscal impact of the crisis on top of a pre-existing structural deficit of about 3 per cent of GDP; discretionary fiscal stimulus was equivalent to only about 1.5 per cent of GDP (IFS, 2010). But the key point is that there was no attempt through fiscal stringency to stop the deficit from increasing, quite unlike 1931. 
11 
Using the standard formula that for fiscal sustainability b > d(r – g) where b is the primary surplus/GDP, r is the interest rate on government debt and g is the growth rate of nominal GDP with the data set from Middleton (2010), in the late 1920s, d = 1.7, r = 4.6 and g = 2.5, if inflation is zero then b = 3.6% but if prices fell at 5 per cent per year, b rose to 12.1%. Conversion of the war debt and gently rising prices in the post gold- standard world changed this so that b fell below 2%. The value of b is quite small in each of these scenarios if d is at the 1913 level of 0.25. 
37 

========39========

and Thomas (2010) point out, this represents a major challenge for active labour-market 
policies. 
There is a further major lesson from the recovery phase of the 1930s, namely, the 
importance of regime change for escaping the liquidity trap. Exit from the gold standard by 
the United States in 1933, together with New Deal policies, changed inflationary 
expectations and produced a dramatic fall in real interest rates. More generally, 
abandoning the gold-standard rule restored independence of monetary policy which was 
valuable for many countries in a world with no policy coordination and bedevilled by wage 
stickiness. Devaluation promoted early recovery and made fiscal consolidation much less 
painful. Here was a classic case where adhering to the wrong policy rule made things worse. 
This obviously has resonance for current Eurozone problems and, especially, for Greece 
which does not have readily available the classic 1930s escape route of devaluation. 
Eichengreen and Temin (2010) argue that it is virtually impossible for a country to impose 
capital controls and leave the Eurozone and that, as the failure of the interwar gold standard 
illustrates, successful fixed exchange-rate systems generally need to be managed in ways 
that share burdens of adjustment between surplus and deficit countries. Wolf (2010) sees 
the Eurozone crisis as reinforcing the need for binding fiscal rules together with a credible 
commitment to a permanent European Stabilization Mechanism to preclude the financial 
crisis that sovereign default would bring. 
At the beginning of the current crisis, international trade collapsed and it was widely 
remarked that there was a chilling parallel with the trade-wars period of the early 1930s 
with its seriously-adverse implications for income levels in the long-term. Subsequently, 
research has found that the contribution of trade barriers to falling world-trade volumes in 
2008-9 was very small, perhaps only 2 per cent (Kee et al. 2010), which is well below 
estimates of 40 per cent or more in the Great Depression. It seems that the structure of 
world trade has changed in ways that make volumes much more sensitive to demand 
shocks; the evidence is reviewed by Grossman and Meissner (2010). 
This raises the important question of why we have seen creeping rather than rampant 
protectionism this time. Research on the interwar period by Eichengreen and Irwin (2009) 
finds that protectionist policies were less likely to be adopted by countries which left the 
38 

========40========

gold standard early, i.e., where there was more freedom to adopt expansionary monetary 
and fiscal policies. They argue that this makes protectionism much less likely now because 
the scope for a macroeconomic policy response is much greater. 
Even so, another big difference from the 1930s may also be relevant, namely, that now we 
have the trade rules overseen by the World Trade Organization (WTO) including bound tariff 
agreements. Evenett (2009) points out that these tariff bindings have held. Unfortunately, 
it is also true that there is a great deal of leeway for WTO-legal increases in trade barriers, 
partly because in many cases tariffs are well below bound levels and partly because anti- 
dumping is not well addressed by the rules. This underlines the importance of reducing the 
scope for governments legally to raise levels of protection and emphasizes that there could 
be real value from concluding the Doha Round (Hoekman et al., 2010). 
Banking crises were at the heart of the Great Depression in the United States. That 
experience and the wider evidence base tells us that such crises are typically very expensive 
in terms of the depth and length of the downturns with which they are associated and the 
fiscal legacy that they bequeath through increased structural deficits and government debt- 
servicing (Laeven and Valencia, 2008). The costs are greater when pre-crisis regulation and 
supervision are weak (Ahrend et al., 2009), as is borne out by the variance of bank failure 
rates across the states of the USA in the 1930s. 
Microeconomic analysis incorporating implications of asymmetric information predicts that 
there is the potential for serious market failures in the banking sector with attendant risks of 
banking crises; for example, a bank run (a coordination failure) can happen even though 
agents are rational and banks are solvent (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983). Moral hazard leading 
to excessive risk-taking which is rational for banks may compound this problem in the 
context of free-riding in monitoring by depositors. Banks’ lending decisions do not take into 
account the (potentially large) social costs of bank failures via the threat to financial stability 
that they entail. 
As the catastrophic experience of the United States in the 1930s makes clear, the policy 
implication is that there is a need both for regulation to reduce the possibility of a crisis by 
curtailing excessive risk-taking and also for crisis-management measures to reduce the 
impact of any crisis (Freixas, 2010). The latter might include deposit insurance together with 
39 

========41========

a central bank that acts effectively as a lender of last resort. The former might just comprise 
regulation that improves the quality of publicly-available information to facilitate market 
discipline of banks. In practice, however, deposit insurance tends to exacerbate moral 
hazard, especially if implicit full-insurance guarantees are given de facto when banks are 
deemed too big to fail. This makes strict regulation of bank behaviour, for example, in 
terms of capital-adequacy rules, or of the size and/or scope of banking activities imperative 
(Bhattacharya et al., 1998). 
In 1929, the United States had a badly-regulated and under-capitalized banking system, an 
inexperienced and incompetent lender of last resort, and no federal deposit insurance. At 
the end of the crisis, responses were made both in terms of prudential regulation and crisis 
management. In 1933, ending the waves of banking crises was both an economic and a 
political imperative. As today, reliance on market discipline appeared unrealistic. The lender 
of last resort had failed. So, the solution was deposit insurance plus regulatory reform and 
the political attractions of the former meant that it would be a permanent feature of the 
American banking system (Calomiris, 2010). Many other countries have followed down this 
path, a choice reinforced by the present crisis. For this solution to work effectively, it is 
crucial that regulation is well-designed. The lesson from the 1930s is that it most probably 
won’t be because vested interests are likely to hijack the politics of regulatory design. In 
particular, it is clear that the Glass-Steagall Act introduced unjustified restrictions on 
universal banking while failing to address the real structural problem, namely, unit banking. 
Nevertheless, given the scope for, and potentially large costs of, market failure in banking 
together with the unavoidable presence of deposit insurance, in principle, tighter regulation 
to contain moral hazard was appropriate both then and now.12 
In late 2008, the Queen pertinently asked why no-one had seen the crisis coming. A similar 
question would have been entirely appropriate in 1931. In some sense, such a lack of 
foresight represents a failure of economics but it is important to be clear what this 
comprises. As the research reviewed in this essay shows, economics has powerful tools that 
12 
The claim that there is a market-failure-based justification for stronger regulation is related to the special features of banking that create instability risks and clearly does not generalize to a case for state intervention across the board on the grounds that the market economy as a whole has failed. That error was commonplace in the 1930s but should not be repeated now. It should also be apparent that 1930s experience does not offer a blueprint for the optimal details of regulation in the different world of today. 
40 

========42========

explain the reasons for and the consequences of financial crises, ex-post. There is no great 
mystery about what went wrong in the United States in the early 1930s and, in principle, it 
is known how to prevent a repetition. Forecasting the course of the depression ex-ante 
would, however, have been extremely difficult, then as now. Inter alia, it would have 
required detailed knowledge of bank balance sheets and a model of when banks would fail, 
together with an estimate of the impact of bank failures on economic activity, plus an ability 
to predict the Federal Reserve’s policy moves and when the United States would leave the 
gold standard. 
The key point is surely the need to take banking crises seriously. Microeconomic analysis 
based on incentive structures in the presence of asymmetric information explains why these 
are likely to happen (Dewatripont and Tirole, 1994) while economic history tells us that they 
have been quite frequent and often very costly (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). This suggests 
that there is a clear need to supplement conventional macroeconomic forecasting models 
with models for policy analysis and simulation which incorporate a financial intermediation 
sector with incentive distortions and information frictions (Bean, 2010) and with ‘early- 
warning’ models that focus on threats to financial stability. 
Unfortunately, the latter are still far from satisfactory. For example, the preferred model in 
Davis and Karim (2008) gave the probability of a banking crisis in the UK in 2007 as 0.6 per 
cent while Giannone et al. (2010) show that the recent financial crisis was more severe on 
average in countries which had very high-quality financial regulation according to existing 
indicators! Moreover, economists have not yet identified with any precision ex-post the 
initial conditions which made for greater vulnerability (Claessens et al., 2010). The policy 
implication is to recognize that maintaining financial stability is a policy objective that will 
not be achieved by inflation targeting but requires additional policy instruments. 
Finally, it is worth noting that in some very important ways economics has had a good crisis 
and lessons from the 1930s have been well heeded. Accepting that the financial crisis was 
allowed to happen and was not predicted, at least the policy response based on economic 
analysis and historical experience prevented a repeat of the trauma of the Great 
Depression. 
41 

========43========

References 
Ahrend, R., Arnold, J. and Murtin, F. (2009), “Prudential Regulation and Competition in 
Financial Markets”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 735. 
Almunia, M. Benetrix, A., Eichengreen, B., O’Rourke, K. H. and Rua, G. (2010), “Lessons 
from the Great Depression”, Economic Policy, 62, 219-265. 
Barber, W.J., (1985), From New Era to New Deal. Herbert Hoover, the Economists, and 
American Economic Policy, 1921-1933, London, Cambridge University Press. 
Bean, C. (2010), “The Great Moderation, the Great Panic and the Great Contraction”, 
Journal of the European Economic Association, 8, 289-325. 
Ben-David, D., Lumsdaine, R. and Papell, D. H. (2003), “Unit Roots, Postwar Slowdowns 
and Long-Run Growth: Evidence from Two Structural Breaks”, Empirical Economics, 
28, 303-319. 
Bernanke, B. (1983), “Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the 
Great Depression”, American Economic Review, 73, 257-276. 
Bernanke, B. (1995), “The Macroeconomics of the Great Depression: a Comparative 
Approach”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 27, 1-28. 
Bernanke, B. and Carey, K. (1996), “Nominal Wage Stickiness and Aggregate Supply in the 
Great Depression”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 853-883. 
Bernanke, B. and James, H. (1991), “The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in 
the Great Depression: an International Comparison”, in R. G. Hubbard (ed.), Financial 
Markets and Financial Crises, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 33-68. 
Bernstein, M.A. (2001) A Perilous Progress: Economists and Public Purpose in Twentieth 
Century America, Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Bhattacharya, A., Boot, A. W. A. And Thakor, A. V. (1998), “The Economics of Bank 
Regulation”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 30, 745-770. 
42 

========44========

Booth, A. (1987), “Britain in the 1930s: a Managed Economy?”, Economic History Review, 
40, 499-522. 
Booth, A. (2001), “New Revisionists and the Keynesian Era in British Economic Policy”, 
Economic History Review, 54, 346-366. 
Bordo, M. D., Erceg, C. and Evans, C. (2000), “Money, Sticky Wages, and the Great 
Depression”, American Economic Review, 90, 1447-1463. 
Bordo, M. D., Goldin, C. and White, E. N. (1998), “The Defining Moment Hypothesis: the 
Editors’ Introduction”, in M. D. Bordo, C. Goldin and E. N. White (eds.), The Defining 
Moment: the Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, 
Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1-20. 
Bordo, M. D. and Lane, J. L. (2010), “The Banking Panics in the United States in the 1930s: 
Some Lessons for Today”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
Boyer, G. R. and Hatton, T. J. (2002), “New Estimates of British Unemployment, 1870- 
1913”, Journal of Economic History, 62, 643-675. 
Broadberry, S. N. (1986), The British Economy between the Wars: a Macroeconomic Survey, 
Oxford, Blackwell. 
Broadberry, S. N. and Crafts, N. F. R. (1992), “Britain’s Productivity Gap in the 1930s: Some 
Neglected Factors”, Journal of Economic History, 52, 531-558. 
Broadberry, S. N. and Crafts, N. (2011), “Openness, Protectionism and Britain’s Productivity 
Performance over the Long Run”, in N. Crafts, T. C. Mills and G. E. Wood (eds.), 
Explorations in Financial and Monetary History, London, Routledge, forthcoming. 
Brown, E. C. (1956), “Fiscal Policy in the ‘Thirties: a Reappraisal”, American Economic 
Review, 46, 857-879. 
Calomiris, C. W. (2010), “The Political Lessons of Depression-Era Banking Reform”, Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
Calomiris, C. W. and Mason, J. R. (2003a), “Consequences of Bank Distress during the Great 
Depression”, American Economic Review, 93, 937-947. 
43 

========45========

Calomiris, C. W. and Mason, J. R. (2003b), “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank Distress during 
the Depression”, American Economic Review, 93, 1615-1647. 
Calomiris, C. W. and Mason, J. R. (2003c), “How to Restructure Failed Banking Systems: 
Lessons from the U.S. in the 1930s and Japan in the 1990s”, NBER Working Paper No. 
9624. 
Calomiris, C. W. and Wilson, B. (2004), “Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: the 1930s 
‘Capital Crunch’ and the Scramble to Shed Risk”, Journal of Business, 77, 421-455 
Campa, J. (1990), “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 1930s: an Extension to 
Latin America”, Journal of Economic History, 50, 677-682. 
Carter, S. B., Gartner, S. S., Haines, M. R., Olmstead, A. L., Sutch, R. and Wright, G. (2006), 
Historical Statistics of the United States, Millennial Edition, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press. 
Christiano, L., Motto, R. And Rostagno, M. (1983), “The Great Depression and the 
Friedman-Schwartz Hypothesis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 35, 1119-1197. 
Claessens, S., Dell-Ariccia, G., Igan, D. and Laeven, L. (2010), “Cross-Country Experiences and 
Policy Implications from the Global Financial Crisis”, Economic Policy, 62, 267-293. 
Clark, A. E., Diener, E., Georgellis, Y. And Lucas, R. E. (2008), “Lags and Leads in Life 
Satisfaction: a Test of the Baseline Hypothesis”, Economic Journal, 118, F222-F243. 
Clarke, S.V.O. (1967), Central Bank Cooperation, 1924-31, New York, Federal Reserve Bank. 
Cole, H. L. and Ohanian, L. E. (1999), “The Great Depression in the United States from a 
Neoclassical Perspective”, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 23, 
2-24. 
Cole, H. L. and Ohanian, L. E. (2004), “New Deal Policies and the Persistence of the Great 
Depression: a General Equilibrium Analysis”, Journal of Political Economy, 112, 779- 
816. 
Crafts, N. F. R. (1987), “Long-Term Unemployment in Britain in the 1930s”, Economic 
History Review, 40, 418-432. 
44 

========46========

Crafts, N. F. R. (1989), “Long-term Unemployment and the Wage Equation in Britain, 1925- 
1939”, Economica, 56, 247-254. 
Davis, E. P. and Karim, D. (2008), “Could Early-Warning Systems Have Helped to Predict the 
Sub-Prime Crisis?”, National Institute Economic Review, 206, 35-47. 
De Long, J. B. (1998), “Fiscal Policy in the Shadow of the Great Depression”, in M. D. 
Bordo, C. Goldin and E. N. White (eds.), The Defining Moment: the Great Depression 
and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century, Chicago, University of Chicago 
Press, 67-85. 
De Long, J. B. and Shleifer, A. (1991), “The Stock Market Bubble of 1929: Evidence from 
Closed-End Mutual Funds”, Journal of Economic History, 51, 675-700. 
Dewatripont, M. and Tirole, J. (1994), The Prudential Regulation of Banks, Cambridge, Mass, 
MIT Press. 
Diamond, D. and Dybvig, P. (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”, Journal 
of Political Economy, 91, 401-419. 
Dimsdale, N. and Horsewood, N. (1995), “Fiscal Policy and Employment in Interwar Britain: 
Some Evidence from a New Model”, Oxford Economic Papers, 47, 369-396. 
Eggertson, G. B. (2008), “Great Expectations and the End of the Depression”, American 
Economic Review, 98, 1476-1516. 
Eichengreen, B. and O’Rourke, K. (2010) “What Do the New Data Tell Us?”, 
www.voxeu.org/index.php 
Eichengreen, B. (1989), “The Political Economy of the Smoot-Hawley Tariff”, Research in 
Economic History, 12, 1-43. 
Eichengreen, B., (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919- 
1939, New York, Oxford University Press. 
Eichengreen, B. (2004), “Understanding the Great Depression”, Canadian Journal of 
Economics, 37, 1-27. 
45 

========47========

Eichengreen, B. and Hatton, T. J. (1987), “Interwar Unemployment in International 
Perspective: an Overview”, in B. Eichengreen and T. J. Hatton (eds.), Interwar 
Unemployment in International Perspective, Dordrecht, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1- 
59. 
Eichengreen, B. and Irwin, D. A. (2009), “The Slide to Protectionism in the Great 
Depression: Who Succumbed and Why?”, NBER Working Paper No. 15142. 
Eichengreen, B. and Jeanne, O. (1998), “Currency Crisis and Unemployment: Sterling in 
1931”, NBER Working Paper No. 6563. 
Eichengreen, B. and Portes, R. (1990), “The Interwar Debt Crisis and Its Aftermath”, World 
Bank Research Observer, 5, 69-94. 
Eichengreen, B. and Sachs, J. (1985), “Exchange Rates and Economic Recovery in the 
1930s”, Journal of Economic History, 45, 925-946. 
Eichengreen, B. and Temin, P. (2010), “Fetters of Gold and Paper”, Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy, 26, 
Evenett, S. J. (2009), “What Can Be Learned from Crisis-Era Protectionism?: an Initial 
Assessment”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7494. 
Feinstein, C. H. (1972), National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom, 
1855-1965, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Feinstein, C.H., Temin P., and Toniolo, G. (1997), The European Economy Between the Wars, 
Oxford, Oxford University Press. 
Ferderer, J. P. and Zalewski, D. A. (1994), “Uncertainty as a Propagating Force in the Great 
Depression”, Journal of Economic History, 54, 825-849. 
Feyrer, J. (2009), “Trade and Income – Exploiting Time Series in Geography”, NBER 
Working Paper No. 14910. 
Field, A. J. (2003), “The Most Technologically Progressive Decade of the Century”, 
American Economic Review, 93, 1399-1413. 
46 

========48========

Findlay, R., and O’Rourke, K.H. (2007), Power and Plenty: Trade, War, and the World 
Economy in the Second Millennium, Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Fishback, P, (2007), “The New Deal”, in Fishback, P. (ed.) Government and the American 
Economy: A New History, Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 
Fishback, P. (2010), “U.S. Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the 1930s”, Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy, 26, 
Frankel, J. A. and Romer, D. (1999), “Does Trade Cause Growth?”, American Economic 
Review, 89, 379-399. 
Freixas, X. (2010), “Post-Crisis Challenges to Bank Regulation”, Economic Policy, 62, 377-399. 
Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A. (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960, 
Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Furceri, D. and Mourougane, A. (2009), “The Effect of Financial Crises on Potential Output: 
New Empirical Evidence from OECD Countries”, OECD Economics Department Working 
Paper No. 699. 
Giannone, D., Lenza, M. and Reichlin, L. (2010), “Market Freedom and the Great Recession”, 
ECARES Working Paper No. 2010-020. 
Gordon, R. J. and Krenn, R. (2010), “The End of the Great Depression, 1939-41: Policy 
Contributions and Fiscal Multipliers”, NBER Working Paper No. 16380. 
Gordon, R. J. and Wilcox, J. A. (1981), Monetarist Interpretations of the Great Depression: 
an Evaluation and Critique”, in K. Brunner (ed.), The Great Depression Revisited, 
Martinus Nijhoff Publishing, The Hague, 49-107. 
Grossman, R. and Meissner, C. (2010), “International Aspects of the Great Depression and 
the Crisis of 2007: Similarities, Differences, and Lessons”, Oxford Review of Economic 
Policy, 26, 
Guichard, S. And Rusticelli, E. (2010), Assessing the Impact of the Financial Crisis on 
Structural Unemployment in OECD Countries”, OECD Economics Department Working 
Paper No. 767. 
47 

========49========

Hall, R. E. (2009), “By How Much Does GDP Rise if the Government Buys More Output?”, 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, 183-231. 
Hanes, C. (2000), “Nominal Wage Rigidity and Industry Characteristics in the Downturns of 
1893, 1929, and 1981”, American Economic Review, 90, 1432-1446. 
Hannah, L. and Temin, P. (2010), “Long-Term Supply-Side Implications of the Great 
Depression”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
Hatton, T. J. and Thomas, M. (2010), “Labour Markets in the Interwar Period and Economic 
Recovery in the UK and the USA”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
Hoekman, B., Martin, W. and Mattoo, A. (2010), “Conclude Doha: It Matters”, CEPR 
Discussion Paper No. 7788. 
Institute for Fiscal Studies (2010), The Green Budget 2010. London. 
Irwin, D.A. (1998), “From Smoot-Hawley to Reciprocal Trade Agreements: Changing the 
Course of US Trade Policy in the 1930s” in Bordo, M.D., Goldin, C., and White, E.N., The 
Defining Moment. The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth 
Century, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 325-352. 
Irwin, D.A. (2010) “Did France Cause the Great Depression”, NBER Working Paper No. 
16350. 
International Monetary Fund (2009), World Economic Outlook. 
Jacks, D. S. (2006), “New Results on the Tariff-Growth Paradox”, European Review of 
Economic History, 10, 205-230. 
Keynes, J.M. (1931),”An Economic Analysis of Unemployment” in Q. Wright (ed.), 
Unemployment as a World Problem, Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 
Kee, H. L., Neagu, C. and Nicita, A. (2010), “Is Protectionism on the Rise?: Assessing 
National Trade Policies during the Crisis of 2008”, World Bank Policy Research Working 
Paper No. 5274. 
48 

========50========

Kendrick, J. W. (1961), Productivity Trends in the United States, Princeton, Princeton 
University Press. 
Kroszner, R. S. and Rajan, R. G. (1994), “Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of the 
U.S. Experience with Universal Banking before 1933”, American Economic Review, 84, 
810-832. 
Laeven, L. and Valencia, F. (2008), “Systemic Banking Crises: a New Database”, IMF 
Working Paper No. 08/224. 
League of Nations (1941), Statistical Yearbook, 1940/1, Geneva. 
Lindert, P. H. (2004), Growing Public, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Maddison, A. (1985), Two Crises: Latin America and Asia 1929-38 and 1973-83, Paris, 
OECD. 
Maddison, A. (2010), Historical Statistics of the World Economy, 1-2008AD, http:// 
www.ggdc.net/maddison 
Madsen, J. (2001), “Trade Barriers and the Collapse of World Trade during the Great 
Depression”, Southern Economic Journal, 67, 848-868. 
Middleton, R. (1985), Towards the Managed Economy, London, Methuen. 
Middleton, R. (2010), “British Monetary and Fiscal Policy in the 1930s”, Oxford Review of 
Economic Policy, 26, 
Mitchell, B. R. (1988), British Historical Statistics, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Mitchener, K. J. (2007), “Are Prudential Supervision and Regulation Pillars of Financial 
Stability? Evidence from the Great Depression”, Journal of Law and Economics, 50, 273- 
302. 
Mitchener, K. J. and Mason, J. (2010), “’Blood and Treasure’: Exiting the Great Depression 
and Lessons for Today”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
O’Brien, A. P. (1989), “A Behavioral Explanation for Nominal Wage Rigidity during the Great 
Depression”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 104, 719-735. 
49 

========51========

Obstfeld, M and Taylor, A.M. (1998), “The Great Depression as a Watershed: International 
Capital Mobility over the Long Run”, in Bordo, M.D., Goldin, C., and White, E.N., The 
Defining Moment. The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth 
Century, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 353-402. 
Obstfeld, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2004), Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and 
Growth, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press. 
Ohanian, L.E. (2009) “What-or Who - Started the Great Depression?, Journal of Economic 
Theory, 144, 2310-2335. 
Olson, J. S. (1988), Saving Capitalism, Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Pensieroso, L. (2007), “Real Business Cycle Models of the Great Depression: a Critical 
Survey”, Journal of Economic Surveys, 21, 110-142. 
Peppers, L. (1973), “Full Employment Surplus Analysis and Structural Change: the 1930s”, 
Explorations in Economic History, 10, 197-210. 
Rappoport, P. and White, E. N. (1993), “Was There a Bubble in the 1929 Stock Market?”, 
Journal of Economic History, 53, 549-574. 
Reinhart, C. M. (2010), “This Time is Different Chartbook: Country Histories on Debt, 
Default, and Financial Crises”, NBER Working Paper No. 15815. 
Reinhart, C. M. and Rogoff, K. S. (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of 
Financial Folly, Princeton, Princeton University Press. 
Rodrik, D. (2002), “Feasible Globalizations”, NBER Working Paper No. 9129. 
Romer, C. (1990), “The Great Crash and the Onset of the Great Depression”, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 105, 597-624. 
Romer, C. (1992), “What Ended the Great Depression?”, Journal of Economic History, 52, 
757-784. 
Romer, C. (2009) “The Economic Crisis: Causes, Policies and Outlook”, Testimony before the 
Joint Economic Committee, April 30. 
50 

========52========

Shepherd, W. G. (1981), “Causes of Increased Competition in the U.S. Economy, 1939- 
1980”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 64, 613-626. 
Shiller, R. (2003), “From Efficient Markets Theory to Behavioral Finance”, Journal of 
Economic Perspectives, 17, 83-104. 
Smiley, G, (2002), Rethinking the Great Depression, Chicago, Ivan R. Dee. 
Solomou, S., (1996), Themes in Macroeconomic History, Cambridge, Cambridge University 
Press. 
Stein, H., (1988), Presidential Economics. The Making of Economic Policy from Roosevelt to 
Reagan and Beyond, Washington DC., American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy 
Research. 
Temin, P. (1976), Did Monetary Forces Cause the Great Depression?, New York, Norton. 
Temin, P. (2008), “Real Business Cycle Views of the Great Depression and Recent Events: a 
Review of Timothy J. Kehoe and Edward C. Prescott’s Great Depressions of the 
Twentieth Century”, Journal of Economic Literature, 46, 669-684. 
Temin, P. and Wigmore, B. A. (1990), “The End of One Big Deflation”, Explorations in 
Economic History, 27, 483-502. 
Temin, P. (1993), “Transmission of the Great Depression”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
7, 87-102. 
Temin, P. (1989), Lessons from the Great Depression, London: The MIT Press. 
Thomas, M. (1983), “Rearmament and Economic Recovery in the Late 1930s”, Economic 
History Review, 36, 552-579. 
Vedder, R.K. and Gallaway, L.E. (1993), Out of Work: Unemployment and Government in 
Twentieth-Century America, New York, Holmes & Meier. 
Velde, F. R. (2009), “The Recession of 1937: a Cautionary Tale”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago Economic Perspectives, 4, 16-37. 
51 

========53========

Wallis, J. J. (2010), “The Political Economy of the New Deal”, Oxford Review of Economic 
Policy, 26, 
Weir, D. R. (1992), “A Century of U.S. Unemployment, 1890-1990: Revised Estimates and 
Evidence for Stabilization”, Research in Economic History, 14, 301-346. 
Wheelock, D. C. (2010), “Lessons Learned?: Comparing the Federal Reserve’s Responses to 
the Crises of 1932-33 and 2007-2009”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 92, 
March/April, 89-107. 
White, E. N. (1986), “Before the Glass-Steagall Act: an Analysis of the Investment-Banking 
Activities of National Banks”, Explorations in Economic History, 23, 33-55. 
Wolf, N. (2008), “Scylla and Charybdis: Explaining Europe’s Exit from Gold, January 1928 
to December 1936”, Explorations in Economic History, 45, 383-401. 
Wolf, N. (2010), “Europe’s Great Depression: the Failure to Coordinate Economic Policies 
after the First World War”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 26, 
52 

========54========

Table 1. The Great Depression vs. Great Recession in the Advanced Countries 
Real GDP Price Level Unemployment 
Trade Volume 
(%) 
1929 100.0 100.0 7.2 100.0 
1930 95.2 90.8 14.1 94.8 
1931 89.2 79.9 22.8 89.5 
1932 83.3 73.1 31.4 76.5 
1933 84.3 71.7 29.8 78.4 
1934 89.0 75.3 23.9 79.6 
1935 94.0 77.6 21.9 81.8 
1936 100.6 81.4 18.0 85.7 
1937 105.3 91.5 14.3 97.4 
1938 105.4 90.4 16.5 87.0 
2007 100.0 100.0 5.4 100.0 
2008 100.5 102.0 5.8 100.6 
2009 97.3 102.9 8.0 85.0 
2010 99.6 103.7 8.4 93.3 
Sources, 1929-38 
Real GDP: Maddison (2010), western European countries plus western offshoots. 
Price Level: League of Nations (1941); data are for wholesale prices, weighted average of 17 
countries 
Unemployment: Eichengreen and Hatton (1987); data are for industrial unemployment, 
weighted average of 11 countries 
Trade volume: Maddison (1985), weighted average of 16 countries 
Source, 2007-2010 
IMF, World Economic Outlook Database, April 2010 
53 

========55========

54 

========56========

Table 2. The Great Depression in the United Kingdom and the United States 
Real GDP GDP Deflator Unemployment 
Stock Market 
(%) 
Prices 
UK 
1929 100.0 100.0 8.0 100.0 
1930 99.9 99.6 12.3 80.5 
1931 94.4 97.2 16.4 62.8 
1932 95.1 93.7 17.0 60.2 
1933 96.0 92.5 15.4 74.3 
1934 102.8 91.7 12.9 90.3 
1935 106.6 92.6 12.0 100.0 
1936 109.9 93.1 10.2 115.9 
1937 114.7 96.6 8.5 108.0 
1938 118.2 99.3 10.1 88.5 
USA 
1929 100.0 100.0 2.9 100.0 
1930 91.4 96.4 8.9 69.4 
1931 85.6 86.3 15.6 35.8 
1932 74.4 76.2 22.9 30.8 
1933 73.4 74.2 20.9 46.2 
1934 81.3 78.4 16.2 45.8 
1935 88.6 79.9 14.4 63.1 
1936 100.0 80.7 10.0 79.8 
1937 105.3 84.1 9.2 50.5 
1938 101.6 81.7 12.5 61.7 
Sources: UK 
Real GDP: Feinstein (1972) 
GDP deflator: Feinstein (1972) 
55 

========57========

Unemployment: Boyer and Hatton (2002) 
Stock market prices: Mitchell (1988) 
Sources: USA 
Carter et al. (2006) 
Note: 
Unemployment based on the whole-economy series constructed by Weir (1992) 
56 

========58========

Table 3. Growth Accounting Decompositions, United States 1919-1941 (% per year) 
ΔY/Y 
ΔK/K 
ΔL/L 
ΔA/A 
Δ(Y/L)/(Y/L) 
GDP 
1919-29 3.08 2.69 1.10 1.44 1.96 
1929-41 2.52 0.04 0.27 2.03 2.25 
Private Non-Farm 
1919-29 4.06 2.93 1.73 2.04 2.30 
1929-41 2.36 -0.14 -0.02 2.34 2.38 
Note: ΔA/A is TFP growth derived by imposing an aggregate Cobb-Douglas production function, Y = AKαL1-α. L is measured in terms of hours worked. 
Source: derived from Kendrick (1961). 
57 

========59========

