November 2010 
                                              No.25 
Explaining Institutional Change: Why Elected Politicians Implement Direct Democracy 
David Hugh Jones University of Warwick 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Explaining Institutional Change: 
Why Elected Politicians Implement Direct Democracy 
January 22, 2009 
Abstract 
Why did representative politicians introduce direct democratic reforms, 
thus binding their own hands? This paper presents a formal model in 
which (1) voters are uncertain about their representative’s preferences; (2) 
direct and representative elections are substitute methods for voters to 
control outcomes. Some politicians beneﬁt from the introduction of direct 
democracy, since they are more likely to survive representative elections. 
Historical evidence from the introduction of the initiative, referendum and 
recall in America supports the theory, which also explains two puzzling 
empirical results: legislators are trusted less, but reelected more, in US 
states with direct democracy. 
JEL Classiﬁcation: D72 
Keywords: direct democracy, institutional change, referendums 
1 

========2========

1 Introduction 
There are two schools of thought about direct democratic institutions like the US ballot 
initiative and the popular referendum. One school claims that direct democracy beneﬁts 
the voters, at the expense of politicians, by allowing voters to override their representa- 
tives when they make bad or self-interested choices (Matsusaka 2004, Gerber 1996, Lupia 
and Matsusaka 2004). The other believes that direct democracy is bad for everybody: 
politicians lose power, but inexpert voters are likely to make bad choices (Broder 2000, 
Schrag 2004). Most recent political science work, both theoretical and empirical, supports 
the ﬁrst school: voters are made better oﬀ. Whatever their relative merits, both views 
create a fundamental puzzle. Modern direct democratic institutions cannot be introduced 
without politicians’ consent. But on either of the accounts above, they have no reason to 
do this. 
What about other extant rational choice theories of institutional change? These theories 
assume (1) that political actors initiate change because they foresee gains from it; (2) 
complete information among all participants. The assumptions provide a well-deﬁned 
range of explanations. Weak governments can be forced to introduce change by an opposi- 
tion coalition; political partners may bargain their way to an eﬃciency-improving reform; 
incumbents introduce change to protect themselves from new political entrants, or as con- 
cessions to head oﬀ deeper change. These theories also implicitly explain why change 
mostly does not happen. Political outsiders want changes that increase their power, but 
incumbents do not; if outsiders win power, they become incumbents and lose their incen- 
tive to make changes. For example, the British Labour Party supported Proportional Rep- 
resentation during the 1980s, but changed its mind after it came to power. 
The introduction of direct democracy in America is problematic for these theories. Under 
complete information, no party in oﬃce gains from introducing direct democracy, as this 
gives the voters veto power over its decisions. Were weak incumbents forced to make this 
2 

========3========

concession by opposition parties and interest groups? Sometimes, but sometimes direct 
democracy was introduced by political parties who had just won power and were in a 
position of strength – in the US, reformist Democrats and Republicans – and who wanted 
radical social change, but nevertheless gave the people a veto over these changes. (Section 
4 supports these claims in more detail.) 
This paper builds a theoretical model in which some elected politicians gain from intro- 
ducing direct democracy, for two reasons: 
1. Politicians who foresee losing oﬃce wish to tie their opponents’ hands. 
2. With politicians’ hands tied by direct democratic institutions, voters have less 
incentive to vote them out of oﬃce. So (some) politicians are more likely to get 
reelected, while implementing policies closer to their own preferences. 
The ﬁrst point has already been mentioned. The innovation is the second point, which 
gives a new result: even some politicians who expect to be reelected will like direct democ- 
racy. 
The model ignores the short-term electoral beneﬁts of introducing direct democracy and 
thus being seen as a reformer. Only the comparative statics of politicians’ welfare with 
and without direct democratic constraints are examined. Also, politicians are purely 
policy-motivated. A strong oﬃce motivation would increase the incentive to introduce 
direct democracy, by making it more attractive to trade policy power for stable tenure in 
oﬃce. 
The model is based on some key assumptions, shown in Table 1. First, as mentioned, 
voters have incomplete information – they are uncertain about the best policy to pursue. 
Representatives, by contrast, are informed.1 However, representatives may not share the 
1. Exactly how this happens is not a trivial question but is not the focus here. Kessler 
(2005) endogenizes the choice to become informed and shows that representatives will do 
3 

========4========

preferences of the electorate. The electoral mechanism provides a way to remove represen- 
tatives who stray too far from what the voters want. My second assumption is that this 
mechanism is imperfect. Representatives cannot always be disciplined by elections. For 
example, politicians who intend to retire at the end of their term, or who cannot run for 
re-election due to term limits, will not be constrained by elections. Certain issues may be 
too complicated or boring for the electorate to understand. Because of these occasions, 
voters have an interest in the real preferences of those they elect, and they may also ben- 
eﬁt from introducing a second kind of control of politicians – direct democratic restraints 
such as the citizen’s initiative and referendum. 
Viewing direct democratic institutions as a curb on the representative leads to the third 
assumption: these institutions interact with representative democracy. This happens in at 
least two ways. First, popular referendums and ballot initiatives are introduced in 
response to the perceived shortcomings of the policy implemented by representatives. For 
example, in 1978 California passed Proposition 13 – a swingeing tax limitation which is 
still controversial 30 years later – not because voters were convinced in the abstract of the 
need for direct popular control over taxation, but because they thought that existing 
taxes, set by the legislature, were too high. In game-theoretic terms, the representative’s 
choice of policy provides information to voters about the state of the world. Second, the 
availability of direct democratic measures aﬀects representative elections: voters will be 
less concerned about a representative’s policy preferences if they know that these can be 
overridden, and representatives will behave diﬀerently in the light of that knowledge. 
The ﬁnal assumption is about the diﬀerent ways direct and representative elections work. 
A ballot initiative or referendum involves overriding a political decision. That is, the 
voters change their representative’s policy and put another one in its place. In the model 
so if the cost of acquiring information is not too high. When they do not do so, there is no 
advantage to representative democracy. 
4 

========5========

this happens after the policy is revealed, but before its consequences are discovered. Rep- 
resentative elections, by contrast, are about judging a political decision after the conse- 
quences. The trade-oﬀ is between ex ante ignorance and learning from bitter experience. 
[Table 1 about here] 
The basic idea here, that the interaction between diﬀerent kinds of elections provides a 
motive for elected representatives to support direct democracy, could be modeled in dif- 
ferent ways. For example, suppose that politicians have varying policy preferences, and 
also vary in competence. Under representative democracy, the voters will trade oﬀ compe- 
tence with extremism. Under direct democracy, the trade-oﬀ will shift. Policy extremism 
will matter less, since it can be restrained by referendums or initiatives, and competence 
will matter more. So competent extremists will be reelected more often, and will have a 
reason to support direct democracy. 
This paper focuses on a diﬀerent trade-oﬀ, which exists even when politicians vary only in 
their policy preferences. Initiatives and referendums substitute the uninformed choice of 
the electorate for the informed but perhaps non-centrist choice of the politician. They 
therefore work best when they are not used, i.e. when the electorate can trust the politi- 
cian’s choice. In eﬀect, from being an elected dictator, the politician becomes a kind of 
adviser (though with strong agenda power): the voters can choose to accept or reject his 
proposals. While an extreme dictator is always harmful, an extreme adviser can be cor- 
rected for. Knowing a politician’s preferences helps the voters decide when to trust him. 
For example, a left-winger who chooses a rightwing policy is less likely to be motivated by 
ideology than by a recognition of political circumstances. Thus both the voters and an 
incumbent politician can gain from the incumbent’s reelection. On the other hand, direct 
democracy is less useful with a newly elected politician whose policy preferences are 
unknown. So direct democratic restraints make incumbents more electable – as empirical 
research conﬁrms (Bali and Davis 2007). 
5 

========6========

Another insight follows from this approach. Since direct democracy allows a wider range 
of incumbents to be reelected, the average policy distance between voters and politicians 
increases. This can explain another ﬁnding that has puzzled empirical researchers: voters 
trust their politicians less in direct democratic states (Kelleher and Wolak 2007). 
The next section reviews the relevant literature. Section 3 develops the model. Section 4 
discusses historical evidence from the development of direct democracy in the United 
States during the Progressive era. The conclusion contemplates further research on how 
representative and direct democratic institutions interact, and makes the case for more 
incomplete information models of institutional change. 
2 Literature review 
There is a large literature on endogenous institutional change. This review examines 
existing explanations of deliberate change, as opposed to unintended evolution (e.g. Greif 
and Laitin 2004), and focuses on rational choice theories, which assume that actors have a 
sense of their interests and form rational expectations about the future. Myopia, chance 
and character certainly matter but it is extremely hard to weave them into a systematic 
theory. Finally, I examine reforms of an existing system, rather than “constitutional 
choice” in an institutional vacuum (e.g. O’Donnell et al. 1986; Przeworski 1991; Bawn 
1993). 
These reforms are paradoxical. They are made by powerful actors – the winners under the 
existing system. Why, then, would they risk changing it? We can categorize existing theo- 
ries by their answer to this question. First, there are eﬃciency theories. In these, change 
takes place because it makes all players better oﬀ, or when winners gain more than losers 
lose, and can compensate them. To avoid vacuity these theories must explain the times 
6 

========7========

when change does not take place. For example, under some circumstances players may be 
unable to credibly commit to compensate losers. Geddes (1991) suggests that Latin Amer- 
ican civil service reform takes place when political parties are roughly equal in strength, so 
that both lose from patronage – in eﬀect they are in a Prisoner’s Dilemma, which reform 
can eliminate. Rogowski (1987) claims that states with open economies are more likely to 
have proportional representation to reduce ineﬃcient distributive politics. 
Second, incumbents may make reforms under pressure from a rising opponent. Acemoglu 
and Robinson (2006) and Boix (2003) claim that the rich introduce democracy so as to 
avoid revolution. Relatedly, the rules may be changed so as to head oﬀ the rise of com- 
petitors, following Di Lampedusa’s advice that “everything must change so that every- 
thing can stay the same”. For example, it has been suggested that ruling parties brought 
in proportional representation so as to avoid being wiped out electorally by rising socialist 
parties (Rokkan 1970, Boix 1999). Similarly, Diaz-Cayeros and Magaloni (2001) show how 
the Mexican PRI set electoral rules so as to grant some, but not too much, power to its 
opponents, thus sustaining its hegemony for most of the 20th century. Dunleavy and Mar- 
getts (1995) propose that changes in pluralist democracy are in general designed to pre- 
serve existing elites from rival coalitions (majority-preferred alternatives in a multi-dimen- 
sional policy space). 
Third, if a group has power, but does not expect to keep it for long, it may change insti- 
tutions as a way to embed its interests. This is particularly relevant in democratic con- 
texts with regular institutionalized changes of leadership. McCubbins et al. (1987) theo- 
rize that regulations on bureaucracies are designed to ensure that the political coalition 
which creates a new law is able to monitor its enforcement. 
A ﬁnal group of explanations is closest to the spirit of this paper: that of institutions 
as “credible commitments”. North and Weingast (1989) explain the institutions brought in 
by the Glorious Revolution as a way for the sovereign to commit not to expropriate his 
7 

========8========

subjects. This then allowed greater economic growth, which in turn beneﬁted the 
sovereign. Acemoglu and Robinson (2006) emphasize that when under pressure, the rich 
oﬀer democracy as a way to credibly commit to redistributive policies. If they simply 
promised redistribution, this promise would be broken in times of political stability, and 
so would not be credible. These papers do not invoke incomplete information: it is 
assumed that the sovereign would always expropriate if he needed to (the rich would never 
redistribute if they could avoid it). The literature on the political economy of central bank 
independence suggests that a Left-wing party may grant central bank independence so as 
to neutralize voters’ worries about its monetary policy (Milesi-Ferretti 1995). This will 
make the party more electable, so that it can aﬀord to introduce its preferred policies in 
other areas. 
How do these theories fare at explaining the introduction of direct democracy in the 
United States? The issue is as follows. The constitutional amendment introducing direct 
democracy was introduced in most states by the legislature, before it was voted on by the 
people.2 Before direct democracy was introduced, legislatures made the law. Afterwards, 
the people could veto those laws by popular referendum, or introduce laws the legislatures 
did not want by the ballot initiative. Also, the populace as a whole cannot be a bar- 
gaining partner: there is no way that the median voter can “commit” to reelecting legisla- 
tures in exchange for any possible gains (cf. Acemoglu 2003). Thus, eﬃciency explana- 
tions are unlikely to work. Nor does it seem plausible that these reforms were granted for 
fear of something worse. Indeed, handing over law-making power was often a gateway to 
further constitutional changes. For example, in Oregon, after the 1905 legislature tried to 
bring in a constitutional convention in order, it was rumored, to rescind the new direct 
democratic provisions, citizens initiated a constitutional amendment allowing a constitu- 
2. In Oklahoma, Arizona and Massachusetts a specially elected constitutional convention 
brought in direct democratic measures as part of a wholesale rewrite of the state constitu- 
tion. 
8 

========9========

tional convention only after a popular vote. And unlike changes to electoral institutions, 
direct democracy provides no way to buy oﬀ particular opponents and preserve an incum- 
bent’s power. 
The third explanation seems more plausible: reformists gained temporary power, then 
introduced direct democracy so as to give the people a veto in case their successors undid 
their reforms. This argument ﬁts many cases quite well (see Section 4), and the model 
here formalizes the intuition. However, there remain problems. The people’s veto was a 
double edged sword which could be – and was – used against reformers. Only politicians 
who are likely to lose power will wish to tie their successors’ hands in this way. Further- 
more, as de Figueiredo (2002) points out, politicians with a long-term perspective can bar- 
gain with political opponents to preserve each others’ reforms. Finally, constitutional 
changes in most US states required a 2/3 supermajority in the legislature; and at this 
time, legislative constituencies were heavily biased towards more conservative rural areas 
and against the new industrial cities (David and Eisenberg 1961; Hamm and Moncrief 
1999). These factors together made it hard to achieve a legislative supermajority for direct 
democratic reform made only out of extreme reformers who expected to lose oﬃce. 
The model here combines this explanation with the “credible commitment” story. Some 
extreme candidates for oﬃce, who do not expect to get reelected, prefer direct democracy 
because it will bind their successors. But less extreme candidates also prefer direct democ- 
racy, because voters who can vote down extreme policies in a ballot initiative have less 
desire to forestall those policies by voting a candidate out. This in turn lets some candi- 
dates implement policies closer to their ideal point. 
Incomplete information plays a key role in this story, as it does not in previous credible 
commitment models of institutional reform.3 Voters always prefer politicians whose prefer- 
ences are closer to their own, so if politicians’ preferences are visible, they will always 
3. With the exception of some of the work on central bank independence. 
9 

========10========

reelect an incumbent if and only if he is closer than the average to the median voter, 
whatever the democratic institutions (see Section 3.2). When politicians’ preferences are 
unknown, voters must learn about them from their policy choices, and there is a trade-oﬀ 
between a known, though extreme incumbent and an unknown challenger. Under direct 
democracy, a familiar politician becomes more useful, since voters can judge whether to 
accept his proposals, and incumbents thus become more electable. 
Empirical research has not found a very compelling general explanation of the spread of 
direct democracy. Scarrow (1997) examines the expansion of direct democracy in Ger- 
many and ﬁnds that parties introduced reforms when the quest for short-term electoral 
advantage caused a breakdown of long-term inter-party cooperation. However, whenever 
state parties introduced the statewide initiative and referendum, i.e. chose to limit their 
own power, her cases show the major parties collaborating. She explains this as a reaction 
to declining turnout. This may be reasonable but it assumes that parties take a long-term 
perspective on the health of democracy, which sits oddly with the basic thesis of short-ter- 
mist competition. Bowler et al. (2002) survey legislators’ support for direct democratic 
reforms in 3 nations. In their theoretical section they admit candidly that “legislators will 
ﬁnd direct democracy an unappealing institution”. They do ﬁnd that ideology predicts 
support for reforms. However, predicting behaviour from surveyed opinions, at best a 
hopeful enterprise, is particularly problematic in this case. (The same goes for Bowler et 
al. (2006), which ﬁnds quite high levels of expressed support for direct democracy among 
legislators.) They conclude by suggesting that reforms will be forced on weak legislators 
by outsider coalitions. Smith and Fridkin (2008) provide supporting evidence, showing 
that during the progressive era, minority party strength predicted the legislature’s likeli- 
hood of placing on the ballot a constitutional amendment granting the citizen’s initiative. 
This argument it is intuitively attractive: if legislators have no reason to bind their hands, 
they must have been forced to do so. However, there is a problem of commitment on both 
sides. First, legislators may promise to support reform but fail to deliver once in oﬃce. 
10 

========11========

Indeed, Bowler et al. write “[i]t is not surprising... to ﬁnd examples of legislators sup- 
porting bills in favour of CIRs [Citizen Initiated Referendums] while in Opposition, yet 
opposing an identical bill, or letting authorizing legislation languish, once they win Gov- 
ernment”. Second, voters or interest groups who have threatened to punish these non-per- 
forming legislators may face the problem that the alternative is no better. Also, although 
the argument ﬁts many US states which introduced direct democracy, complementing the 
case in which reformers gain temporary power, other states do not seem to ﬁt this frame- 
work (again, see Section 4). It therefore seems worthwhile to look for further explana- 
tions. 
This paper also adds to the collection of formal models of direct democracy. The classic 
models used complete information (Romer and Rosenthal 1978, Gerber 1996), while more 
recent work introduces incomplete information. In particular, Kessler (2005) shows, in a 
model with uninformed voters, that direct democracy may lower elected oﬃcials’ incentive 
to become informed – a choice not examined here. The paper’s framework is similar to 
this one’s, but the interaction between direct and representative democracy is not fully 
modelled. 
3 The model 
There are two periods. In each period t = 1, 2 a politician observes a shock εt ∼ N(0, σ2ε) 
and chooses a policy pt. The outcome is wt = pt 
 
εt. (Numbered subscripts will be 
dropped when the sense is obvious.) The voters do not observe the shock, only the out- 
come in each period. All players’ utility is quadratic in each period: total utility for a 
player with ideal point i is 
 (i 
 w1)2 
 δ(i 
 w2)2 where δ is the common discount rate. 
Rather than simply referring to time, δ can be interpreted as representing the tradeoﬀ 
between periods 1 and 2, that is, the likelihood, over a range of issues and times, that a 
11 

========12========

politician will be free of the threat of reelection. When this is very low, all players are 
more concerned with the “pre-election” period 1 eﬀect of direct democracy. When δ is high 
they are concerned with period 2, and the possibility of restraining the politician with a 
ballot proposal. 
All players’ ideal points are private information. After period 1, the voters vote to keep 
the incumbent or elect a challenger, by majority rule. The median voter’s ideal point is 0; 
Banks and Duggan (2006) provide a median voter theorem for lotteries over outcomes 
when utility is quadratic. The incumbent and challenger’s ideal points k are drawn from a 
normal distribution N(0, σ2k) which is independent of ε. Write ϕk for the density function 
of k and Φk for its cumulative distribution function. Similarly ϕε and Φε for the shock. 
In period 2 the politician is not facing reelection. However, under direct democracy, the 
voters observe p2 before the policy is implemented, and vote to keep it or replace it by a 
default policy of 0. This models a popular referendum process in which voters may choose 
to challenge the proposed policy and replace it with an existing default, which is assumed 
to be the optimal policy given the distribution of shocks. (This maximizes the voters’ 
incentive to choose the default and thus makes life as hard as possible for the politician: if 
the default were less attractive, the politician would be better oﬀ.)4 A more complete 
model would allow voters to do the same in period 1: we limit direct democracy to period 
2 for simplicity’s sake. We also allow the politician to step down after period 1 (for 
example, if the voters would never accept his policies in period 2, and he would do better 
under a challenger). 
4. An alternative assumption would be that there is an initiative process with some kind of 
open agenda-setting process in which the median voter can select the optimal initiative 
given p. If so, this essentially becomes a game of cheap talk in which the politician recom- 
mends p and the median voter chooses the ultimate policy. This assumption seems opti- 
mistic about the openness of direct democratic agenda-setting. 
12 

========13========

Voters learn the proposed policy p2 before voting on it in period 2. This can be thought of 
as the eﬀect of an election campaign, in which those with extreme preferences (on either 
side of the issue) will make costly eﬀorts to inform others about what is at stake, through 
advertisements, leaﬂets et cetera. Thus voters learn p (as opposed to the outcome they 
experience, w) only when there is a direct democratic campaign. 
In any period, a politician who knows his ideal point k and the shock ε gets utility from a 
policy p of 
 ( p 
 ε 
 k)2. This policy utility is single peaked with the peak at p = k + ε. 
Call q = k + ε the politician’s induced policy ideal point. Single-peakedness implies that, if 
policies within an interval [ p, p¯] are available, and a point in the interval’s interior p∈ ( p, 
p¯) is chosen, then q = p; otherwise a lower or higher policy would have been chosen 
instead. 
3.1 Results 
The setup gives us a game of incomplete information. Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium 
(PBE) is the standard equilibrium concept for this kind of games (see e.g. McCarty and 
Meirowitz 2007). Using it I ﬁnd a set of sensible equilibria. Unfortunately other, less sen- 
sible ones also exist: these are ruled out with the Intuitive Criterion, a well-known reﬁne- 
ment for signaling games (Cho and Kreps 1987). 
We use the model to compare the expected welfare of politicians under the two diﬀerent 
systems. The ﬁrst proposition replicates the ﬁndings of the existing literature: if we ignore 
the eﬀect of representative elections, no politician wants direct democracy. This is trivial. 
In period 2, under representative democracy, a politician gets exactly what she wants, 
while under direct democracy in general she does not. 
Proposition 1. In period 2, any politician weakly prefers representative democracy to 
direct democracy, and an incumbent reelected from period 1 strictly prefers it. 
13 

========14========

All proofs are in the appendix. 
In the ﬁrst period, politicians correct for the shock when choosing a policy: in eﬀect, they 
simply choose an outcome w1, and the voters are aware of this. Thus, the ﬁrst period 
shock plays no role. Figure 1 shows ﬁrst period equilibrium behaviour. If the outcome is 
in an interval around the median voter’s ideal point of 0, then the politician is reelected. 
Politicians with ideal points in the interval implement their ideal outcome, taking into 
account the eﬀect of the shock. On either side of this reelection region, there is an area 
where politicians choose the nearest endpoint of the region rather than their own ideal 
point: they accept a policy loss now, in order to get reelected and choose policy in period 
2. Further out, politicians again implement their own most preferred outcome, and are not 
reelected. 
[Figure 1 about here] 
The reelection region is small enough that the voters prefer to reelect an incumbent politi- 
cian who is at the endpoint – knowing that in fact, this politician would prefer a more 
extreme policy, and will try to implement it in the second period. If this condition is sat- 
isﬁed, then the voters will be happy to reelect the less extreme incumbents politicians who 
choose outcomes inside the reelection interval. On the other hand, the reelection region is 
large enough that voters will not reelect a politician who chooses something outside the 
reelection region. Since some policy outcomes are never observed in equilibrium – the 
dashed line in the picture – there is a range of reelection regions satisfying both this con- 
straint and the endpoint reelection constraint. So we have multiple equilibria. 
We start the analysis of direct democracy by examining period 2. (Period 2 in representa- 
tive democracy is straightforward: the elected politician implements her ideal outcome.) 
There are two cases. Either a challenger, with an unknown ideal point, has been elected, 
or the incumbent has been reelected. If a challenger has been elected, because voters do 
14 

========15========

not know the likely direction of his bias, the choice to trust him or not is the same what- 
ever policy he proposes. As it turns out, the voters accept any policy proposed if σ2ε > σ2k, 
and reject any policy proposed if σ2ε < σ2k, replacing it with the default of 0. In eﬀect, the 
choice is between two kinds of shocks, one caused by the unknown policy environment and 
one caused by an unknown politician’s diﬀerence from the median voter. 
The case with a reelected politician is quite diﬀerent. Even if the politician is very 
extreme, because the direction of his bias is known (by his choice in period 1), it can be 
accounted for. Indeed, whenever the proposed policy goes against the politician’s bias, the 
voters know they will do better by accepting it. That is, if the politician proposes p2 < 0 
and the voters know k2 > 0, they will always accept p2 instead of the default policy of 0. 
I.e., if a rightwing politician prefers a more leftwing policy to the default, the median 
voter will have the same preferences. So, whenever the shock leads the politician to “go 
against” his prior belief, his policy proposal is accepted. As the saying runs, it takes a 
Nixon to go to China (Cukierman and Tommasi 1998). 
Intuitively, we might expect a rightwing politician proposing an extremely rightwing 
policy to be voted down. This is not necessarily true. If the politician were really extreme, 
he would not have been reelected in period 1: a very rightwing policy means he must be 
countering a big leftwards shock. So there are possible equilibria in which very rightwing 
policies are accepted when a moderate rightist proposes them. However, for simplicity, we 
assume that when a rightwing politician proposes any rightwing policy, it is rejected. This 
is the smallest possible equilibrium in terms of the set of policies accepted in period 2, and 
therefore the worst possible equilibrium for politicians. If some politicians prefer direct 
democracy under this equilibrium, this will be true in all cases. Period 2 under direct 
democracy is illustrated in Figure 2. 
[Figure 2 about here.] 
15 

========16========

We can now say some more about period 1. The diﬀerent results when a challenger is 
reelected (his proposal is always accepted if σ2k  σ2ε, and always rejected when σ2ε < σ2k) 
make a large diﬀerence to the period 1 equilibria. In fact, if σ2ε < σ2k, a newly elected chal- 
lenger is a useless object: the voters do not know enough about his ideal point to trust 
him, whatever policies he proposes! On the other hand, even a very extreme incumbent, 
whose ideal point is known, can be trusted some of the time. For this reason, in equilib- 
rium when σ2ε < σ2k, incumbents are always reelected. This result contains the central intu- 
ition of this paper. Direct democracy turns politicians from dictators into advisers. A dic- 
tator whose preferences are known is still dangerous, but an adviser whose preferences are 
known can be corrected for. Thus, direct democracy raises the value of incumbency. 
However, this extreme result only applies when σ2ε < σ2k – that is, when an unconstrained 
politician is actually worse for the median voter than choosing himself. When σ2ε  σ2k, the 
result is less clear. (A really extreme politician would almost never propose a trustworthy 
policy in period 2, so the voters would usually choose the default policy of 0 and suﬀer the 
eﬀects of the policy shock. So it is better for them to elect an unknown challenger if he is 
fairly trustworthy.) 
Concretely, what does σ2ε < σ2k mean? The variance of ε measures the unpredictability of 
the policy environment to voters. Thus, σ2ε will be lower when voters have direct knowl- 
edge of outcomes, for example when they feel the eﬀects of the economy on their pocket- 
books, and higher for, say, foreign aﬀairs. σ2ε will be low for “easy” policy areas (abortion), 
and high for abstruse ones (ﬁnancial crisis management). It will be low when there is 
widespread consensus on the best policy, and high when experts disagree. Finally, σ2ε will 
rise during times of social change. On the other side of the inequality, σ2k is rather easier 
to understand. When politicians are trustworthy, or when the campaign process provides 
a lot of information on candidates so that bad candidates are not elected, σ2k will be low. 
When politicians are untrustworthy, and when the campaign process is uninformative, σ2k 
16 

========17========

will be higher. It will also be low when strong parties can commit to well-deﬁned pro- 
grams, and high when parties are weak and individual candidates rely on their local power 
base rather than campaign promises. 
When σ2ε < σ2k, before reelection, some incumbents prefer direct democracy (contrast this 
with Proposition 1). This does not only include extremists, who are not reelected and 
therefore want to bind their successors hands; there are always some politicians who would 
be reelected under representative democracy, but who nevertheless prefer direct democ- 
racy. Their loss from direct democracy in period 2 is balanced by being reelected with a 
policy closer to their ideal point. 
All these results are restated formally below. Proofs are in the appendix. 
Lemma 1. Under representative democracy, any equilibrium satisfying the Intuitive Cri- 
terion can be characterized by a pair of points w⋆< 0 and w⋆> 0. 
Equilibrium behaviour is as follows: in period 2 incumbents and challengers implement 
their ideal point p2 = q2. In period 1, the voters reelect the incumbent if and only if the 
outcome w1 ∈ [w⋆, w⋆]. Incumbents with w⋆  k  w⋆ implement their ideal point p1 = q1. So 
do incumbents with k  k⋆, where k⋆> w⋆ and k⋆ is uniquely determined by w⋆; and incum- 
bents with k  k⋆ < w⋆ where k⋆ is uniquely determined by w⋆. Incumbents with k ∈ (w⋆, k⋆) 
(respectively k ∈ (k⋆, w⋆) ) set p1 = w⋆ + ε1 (respectively p1 = 
 w⋆ + ε1) so that the outcome 
is w1 = w⋆ (w1 = w⋆). 
The set of possible equilibria is as follows: w⋆ may be any point satisfying w  w⋆  w¯; 
similarly w⋆ may be any point satisfying 
 w  w⋆  
 w¯. The bounds w and w¯ are non- 
negative and ﬁxed by the parameters. When δ  1/2, w=0, i.e. there are equilibria in 
which politicians must implement the median voter’s ideal point, w1 = 0 to be reelected. 
17 

========18========

Lemma 2. In any equilibrium satisfying the Intuitive Criterion, in period 2 under direct 
democracy, write A for the acceptance region such that p2 ∈ A is accepted, and write Φk for 
the voters’ probability distribution over the politician’s k at the start of period 2. 
1. Politicians with ideal policy q2 = k2 + ε2 choose p2 = q2 if q2 ∈ A. Otherwise they choose 
the closest point in A to q2. (If  q2 lies closer to 0 than to any other point in A, then any 
point in AC may be chosen; we assume they choose 0.) 
2. R− ⊂ A when the politician is known by the voters to have k  0. When k  0 for sure, 
R+ ⊂ A. 
3. If the voters always know the sign of k and have bounds on k (e.g. Φ(k) = 0 for k < k′, 
Φ(k) = 1 for k > k′′, 0 < k′), at the start of period 2, then the following is a possible equi- 
librium: A = R− when k is known positive, A = R when k = 0, A = R+ when k is known 
negative. 
Lemma 3. Under direct democracy, in period 2, if a challenger has been elected, and if  
σ2k > σ2ε, the voters always reject the challenger’s proposal and choose p2 = 0 instead. If  
σ2k  σ2ε then the challenger proposes p2 = q2 and the voters always accept. 
Proposition 2. Under direct democracy, if  σ2ε < σ2k, then all politicians are reelected in 
period 1. Furthermore, at least some politicians who would be reelected under representa- 
tive democracy nevertheless strictly prefer direct democracy. 
Equilibria when σ2k < σ2ε can be complex. In particular, even politicians who would get 
reelected by choosing their ideal point in period 1 do not necessarily do so. (There is an 
incentive to seem centrist, in order to get more policies accepted in Period 2.) I hypothe- 
size, but do not prove, that for some parameter values there are politicians who prefer 
direct democracy even though they are reelected under representative democracy, as in 
Proposition 2. 
18 

========19========

3.2 A complete information benchmark 
To emphasize the eﬀect of voters’ incomplete information in the model, consider a bench- 
mark in which everything is unchanged except that the voters learn a politician’s ideal 
point k with certainty after he is elected. 
Under representative democracy, voters know that the incumbent will implement his ideal 
point in period 2. So after period 1, they ignore w1 and simply reelect the incumbent iﬀ 
k21  σ2k i.e. if | k1|  σk. Therefore, in period 1 the politician always chooses w1 = k1. 
Under direct democracy, whether the incumbent or a challenger is reelected, the voters 
know k2 in period 2, and set the acceptance region A accordingly. As the voters’ loss in 
period 2 is increasing in | k2| ,5 again in period 1 they reelect if and only if k21  σ2k. Once 
again, in period 1 the politician chooses w1 = k1. As politicians who will not be reelected 
wish to control their successors through direct democracy, and politicians who will be 
reelected do not wish to be controlled, the following proposition is now easy to see. 
Proposition 3. if voters learn k with certainty in each period, then only politicians with 
| k1| > σk, who will not be reelected, strictly prefer direct democracy in period 2; all other 
politicians strictly prefer representative democracy. 
Compare this to Proposition 2. There, some politicians prefer direct democracy even 
though they would be reelected under either institution. Full voter information removes 
this eﬀect. Now only those in a position of political weakness will prefer direct democracy. 
This is in line with some conventional explanations of institutional change. But as we 
shall see in the next section, it does not always ﬁt the facts: the initiative and referendum 
were not always granted by weak politicians who expected to lose oﬃce. The model sug- 
gests why. Consider a legislature composed of some politicians who have been reelected, 
and others who are in their ﬁrst period. Then, even if all legislators are newly elected, all 
5. This is shown by equation (21) in the Appendix. 
19 

========20========

those with ideal points | k| < σk – within one standard deviation of the mean, i.e. about 
two-thirds of legislators – will prefer representative democracy.6 And if some legislators 
were reelected the proportion of opponents would get even higher, making a pro-reform 
majority, let alone a supermajority, rare indeed. 
Adding incomplete information changes the story, so that even politicians in a strong posi- 
tion may favour direct democracy. This improves the odds of a reform passing. It also 
seems to ﬁt the historical facts, to which I now turn. 
4 Historical Discussion 
How did direct democracy come to the US?7 The standard story is as follows. In the 
1900s, the political system in US states came to be seen as broken. Legislators were in 
hock to special interests from business. The electoral system had been corrupted in some 
municipalities; on the other hand, many new industrial cities were grossly underrepre- 
sented by their allocation of seats in the legislature. Neither of the main parties was 
trusted: turnout and partisanship, high throughout the 19th century, declined. (In terms 
of the model, σ2k was high.) 
The ideas of direct democracy were ﬁrst taken up by the Populists in the 1890s, seeking a 
way round the corrupted and unrepresentative system of state representative democracy. 
The Populists did not succeed in general, but they did pass the ﬁrst state initiative law in 
South Dakota. In the 1900s a succession of reformers such as William U’Ren continued 
the ﬁght and eventually forced legislatures to concede in half the US states. Supporters of 
direct democracy included the Progressive movement, Labor unions and farmers’ groups, 
6. We set aside the issue of strategic voting in the legislature. 
7. This section draws on Allswang (2000), Piott (2003), Goebel (2002), Bowler and 
Donovan (2006), Smith and Lubinski (2002) and Haynes (1919), in particular on the detail 
in Piott’s book. 
20 

========21========

as well as some Prohibitionists, all of whom hoped to use the ballot box to circumvent 
obstructionist legislatures. 
This story shows us two of the mechanisms for institutional change discussed in Section 2. 
First, a group that gains short-term power, but does not expect to keep it, may use 
reform to entrench the policy changes it wants. This is what the Populists did in South 
Dakota. Similarly, in Oklahoma, direct democracy was introduced by a constitutional con- 
vention which was 90% Democratic. Previously Republicans had dominated state politics; 
this was the turning point. Later the Democratic legislature restricted direct democracy. 
The change of heart suggests that at convention time, Democrats sought to protect their 
preferred policies from Republican legislators; they changed their mind only when they 
foresaw a stable period of Democratic power. Similarly, in Arizona, a constitutional con- 
vention introduced direct democracy. 
The more important theory is simply that divided or weak legislators may be pressured by 
outside forces into accepting change. In Oregon, the indefatigable activist William U’Ren 
got himself got himself elected along with the Populists, and then used logrolling tactics 
to win over the divided major parties in the legislature, oﬀering Populist legislators’ votes 
in exchange for support for direct democracy. Before the bill introducing the initiative 
and referendum came up for a second vote in 1901, U’Ren helped legislators who had 
voted for him before get reelected; further lobbying ensured it passed again. By 1904 
U’Ren, now a formidable political force in the State, could say of a measure threatening 
the new institutions: “The man who votes for the Brownell bill... is digging his own polit- 
ical grave and getting into it.”8 In some state elections, the Direct Legislation League 
extracted pledges to support direct democracy from candidates for the legislature. For 
instance, in the Maine election of 1906, many candidates who had not pledged their sup- 
port lost their seats; both houses of the subsequent legislature unanimously passed a mod- 
erate bill to introduce the initiative and referendum. 
8. Quoted in Piott (2003) p. 43. 
21 

========22========

These theories are powerful and explain many of the historical cases. They also have the 
advantage of explaining the overall pattern that direct democracy was introduced mostly 
in Western states. These states had weak party systems so that candidates cared more 
about their individual electoral fortunes than about preserving the legislature’s power as a 
whole. Reformers had less success in the East where parties were strong, and in the one- 
party South. Similarly, direct democracy was more likely to be introduced where parties 
were closely tied in the race for oﬃce (Smith and Fridkin 2008). 
However, the history also reveals other actors who were instrumental in introducing direct 
democracy in many states. First, there were “reform” or “insurgent” Democrat and Repub- 
lican politicians, progressives who aimed to wrest control of their parties from the 
machine. They were disciplined political groups, not divided individuals, and rather than 
gaining temporary power, they aimed to take over the political mainstream in the long- 
term, and often succeeded. When, as often, they supported direct democratic measures, 
they did so out of principle rather than short-term expediency. 
For example, in California, the Direct Legislation Leagure had failed throughout the 1900s 
to get measures brought in by pressure on individual legislators: the Southern Paciﬁc Rail- 
road, exerted its great inﬂuence over parties to prevent a vote. Direct democracy was 
introduced in 1911 after the Lincoln-Roosevelt League of Progressive Republicans under 
Hiram Johnson had swept into oﬃce. This group had gained control of the Republicans 
after the introduction of direct primaries in 1910, and passed the initiative and refer- 
endum by huge margins – unanimously in the Assembly. In North Dakota, direct legisla- 
tion in its ﬁnal form was passed in 1918 by the Nonpartisan League of small farmers – a 
kind of throwback to the populists which collapsed shortly thereafter. This ﬁts the “short- 
term power” story. But reform-oriented legislators, having gained the upper hand over the 
party machines, passed no less than four bills introducing direct democracy in 1911. In 
the end a relatively weak form, with high signature requirements to put a measure on the 
22 

========23========

ballot, won out; nevertheless this multitude of alternatives, some quite radical, does not ﬁt 
the picture of legislators being pushed unwillingly to act. 
Why were these reformist members of the main parties keen on binding their future 
hands? Surely, one reason was the short-term reputational advantage to be gained by 
introducing the measures. But there were plenty of other reforms that voters wanted, and 
that would not have tied their hands as legislators in future. It is plausible that, as in the 
model, they traded oﬀ a direct loss in freedom of action, for an increase in freedom of 
action and reelectability due to future voters’ trusting politicians more. 
In other cases, traditional parties introduced direct legislation without strong pressure 
from outside. In Missouri, at a time when the Missouri Direct Legislation League had 
been weakened by the voters’ rejection of direct legislation in 1903, a Democratic gov- 
ernor, Senate and House reintroduced the idea in 1907. Far from embracing the new insti- 
tutions, Missourians then approved precisely none of the fourteen initiative measures 
brought before them between 1910 and 1918 (although they also rejected several referred 
statutes and legislative constitutional amendments). Again, it seems that at least some 
legislators foresaw they could work better within the new system. Similarly, in Arkansas, 
after the original direct democracy measure of 1910 had been weakened by the courts, a 
new law was brought in by the legislature in 1916, but failed at the polls after opposition 
by prohibitionists. In Michigan, where the Republicans were dominant and were to remain 
so until the 1930s, a constitutional convention passed a weak measure in 1908; in 1912, 
prodded by the state governor, the legislature strengthened it. 
In fact, state Governors were often key players in calling for direct democracy, including 
the already-mentioned Hiram Johnson in California and Joseph Folk in Missouri. In Col- 
orado, the popular Progressive Democrat John Shafroth was elected Governor in 1908 
after 5 terms in the state Congress. He campaigned for the initiative and referendum 
throughout the legislative session, brought in a special session to adopt it, and supported 
23 

========24========

the subsequent measure when it came before the voters, at the time of his successful 
reelection bid. In Arizona, the president of the 1916 constitutional convention was one 
George Hunt, a state Senator who had ﬁrst introduced a bill supporting direct democracy 
in 1899, and who later became Governor. Governors’ support of direct democracy has con- 
tinued to this day, perhaps as a way to get round an obdurate legislature. But representa- 
tive politicians introducing their own initiatives is a relatively modern trend (Smith and 
Tolbert 2001). In the Progressive era the trade-oﬀ modeled above seems a more likely 
cause of their support. 
To sum up, outside pressure on legislators was not always enough to introduce direct 
democracy. Nor, except in the cases of North and South Dakota, did Populist radicals 
achieve this aim. As Piott puts it (p. 254): “progressive control of state government was 
key to winning legislative approval of these measures.” Often, these progressives were 
within the main parties and had long-term goals to keep their political power, and often, 
they introduced reforms not when electorally weak or divided but after winning elections 
with large majorities. They must therefore have gained something beyond short-term 
advantage. The model shows two long-term advantages: direct democracy could restrain 
their opponents who might regain oﬃce through the remaining corruption in the political 
system; and it would win back the electorate’s trust, allowing them to pursue their goals 
more eﬀectively when in power.9 
One question is harder to answer. How predictable was the political environment of the 
Progressive era – in terms of the model, how high was σ2ε? Clearly, the 1890s were a time 
of economic change and dislocation. At the same time, by the 1900s, a coherent Progres- 
9. A point not discussed here is that in the era described, the median voter under direct 
democracy could be very far from the median voter for the legislature, due to malappor- 
tionment and other forms of corruption. If Progressives believed that they were close to 
the real median voter, while their future opponents might be far on the other side, this 
would strengthen their motives to support direct democracy. 
24 

========25========

sive program had been formed on a number of issues, and certain states and cities had 
undertaken reforms and thus acted as pathﬁnders for others. It seems probable that by 
the 1910s, when most of the direct democratic reforms were brought in, many voters saw 
politicians less as stewards to face an unknown and uncertain environment, and more as 
agents who ought to be implementing a thoroughly worked-out program of reform, whose 
outline at least was clear. 
5 Conclusion 
Top-down institutional reform, in which those in power voluntarily give it up, is the 
hardest kind of institutional change to explain. The introduction of direct democracy is 
one such tough case. Existing theories fail to appreciate how hard it is: to change a consti- 
tution, a supermajority of legislators must be won over. This paper shows that even 
without internal divisions between those in power, democratic representatives may still 
prefer direct democracy, since the power they lose is compensated by increased trust 
during representative elections. Historical data supports the argument. 
Two broader conclusions come out of this research. For research on direct democracy, 
there are complex links between representative and direct elections. We already know how 
legislators may be threatened by the initiative (Gerber 1996), learn from initiatives in 
nearby states (Boehmke 2005), or seek to weaken their implementation (Gerber et al. 
2001). Scholars have observed that politicians are getting directly involved in initiative 
campaigns (Smith and Tolbert 2001). Modelling this process, in particular of politicians’ 
and initiative proponents’ role as trusted agents, could enhance our understanding further 
(see also Garrett 2004). In particular, the interaction between the branches of government 
may explain direct democracy’s appeal to politicians: Governors can use ballot initiatives 
to bypass the legislature, and the House can override recalcitrant Senators the same way. 
25 

========26========

More generally, our present models of institutional change tend to see the world as a bar- 
gaining process in which people know what they are getting. There is room for a middle 
ground between this rational-choice approach and the historicists who emphasize uncer- 
tainty and habit. Incomplete information, signalling and trust ought to be brought in to 
our understanding of institutional change. 
Bibliography 
Acemoglu, Daron, and James A Robinson. 2006. Economic Origins of Dictatorship and 
Democracy. Cambridge University Press. 
Acemoglu, Daron. 2003. Why not a Political Coase Theorem? Social Conﬂict, Commit- 
ment, and Politics. Journal of Comparative Economics 31, no. 4 (December): 620-652. 
Allswang, John M. 2000. The Initiative and Referendum in California, 1898-1998. Stan- 
ford University Press. 
Bali, Valentina A., and Belinda C. Davis. 2007. One More Piece to Make Us Puzzle: The 
Initiative Process and Legislators’ Reelection Chances. Political Research Quarterly 60(2): 
215. 
Banks, Jeﬀ S, and John Duggan. 2006. A Social Choice Lemma on Voting Over Lotteries 
with Applications to a Class of Dynamic Games. Social Choice and Welfare 26, no. 2: 
285-304. 
Bawn, Kathleen. 1993. The Logic of Institutional Preferences: German Electoral Law as a 
Social Choice Outcome. American Journal of Political Science 37, no. 4 (November): 965- 
989. 
26 

========27========

Boehmke, Frederick J. 2005. The Indirect Eﬀect of Direct Democracy: How Institutions 
Shape Interest Group Systems. Ohio State University Press, Columbus, OH. 
Boix, Carles 2003. Democracy and Redistribution. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Boix, Carles. 1999. Setting the Rules of the Game: The Choice of Electoral Systems in 
Advanced Democracies. American Political Science Review 93, no. 3 (September): 609- 
624. 
Bowler, Shaun, and Todd Donovan. 2006. Direct Democracy and Political Parties in 
America. Party Politics 12, no. 5 (September 1): 649-669. 
Bowler, Shaun, Todd Donovan, and Jeﬀrey A. Karp. 2002. When Might Institutions 
Change? Elite Support for Direct Democracy in Three Nations. Political Research Quar- 
terly 55, no. 4 (December 1): 731-754. 
Bowler, Shaun, Todd Donovan, and Jeﬀrey A. Karp. 2006. Why Politicians Like Electoral 
Institutions: Self-Interest, Values, or Ideology? Journal of Politics 68 (May): 434-446. 
Broder, David S. 2000. Democracy Derailed: Initiative Campaigns and the Power of  
Money. Harcourt, New York. 
Cho, In-Koo, and David M. Kreps. 1987. Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, no. 2 (May): 179-221. 
Cukierman, Alex, and Mariano Tommasi. 1998. When Does It Take a Nixon to Go to 
China? American Economic Review 88, no. 1 (March): 180-197. 
David, Paul T., and Ralph Eisenberg. 1961. Devaluation of the Urban and Suburban 
Vote. Bureau of Public Administration, University of Virginia. 
27 

========28========

Diaz-Cayeros, Alberto, and Beatriz Magaloni. 2001. Party Dominance and the Logic of 
Electoral Design in Mexico’s Transition to Democracy. Journal of Theoretical Politics 13, 
no. 3 (July 1): 271-293. 
Dunleavy, Patrick, and Helen Margetts. 1995. Understanding the Dynamics of Electoral 
Reform. International Political Science Review 16, no. 1 (January 1): 9-29. . 
Figueiredo, Rui J. P. de. 2002. Electoral Competition, Political Uncertainty, and Policy 
Insulation. American Political Science Review 96, no. 2 (June): 321-333. 
Garrett, Elizabeth. 2004. Hybrid Democracy. George Washington Law Review 73: 1096. 
Geddes, Barbara. 1991. A Game Theoretic Model of Reform in Latin American Democra- 
cies. American Political Science Review 85, no. 2 (June): 371-392. 
Gerber, Elisabeth R. 1996. Legislative Response to the Threat of Popular Initiatives. 
American Journal of Political Science 40 (1):99-128. 
Gerber, Elisabeth R., Arthur Lupia, and Matthew McCubbins. 2001. Stealing the Initia- 
tive: How State Government Responds to Direct Democracy. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
Goebel, Thomas. 2002. A Government By the People: Direct Democracy in America, 
1890-1940. Chapel Hill: UNC Press. 
Greif, Avner, and David D. Laitin. 2004. A Theory of Endogenous Institutional Change. 
American Political Science Review 98, no. 4: 633-652. 
Hamm, Keith E., and Gary F. Moncrief. 1999. Legislative Politics in the States. In Vir- 
ginia Gray and Russell L. Hanson, eds., Politics in the American States: A Comparative 
Analysis 7th edition. CQ Press. 
28 

========29========

Haynes, George H. 1919. How Massachusetts Adopted the Initiative and Referendum. 
Political Science Quarterly 34, no. 3 (September): 454-475. 
Kelleher, Christine A., and Jennifer Wolak. 2007. Explaining Public Conﬁdence in the 
Branches of State Government. Political Research Quarterly 60, no. 4 (December 1): 707- 
721. 
Kessler, Anke S. 2005. Representative versus Direct Democracy: The Role of Informa- 
tional Asymmetries. Public Choice 122, no. 1/2 (January): 9-38. 
Matsusaka, John G. 2004. For the Many Or the Few: The Initiative, Public Policy, and 
American Democracy. University of Chicago Press. 
McCarty, Nolan M., and Adam Meirowitz. 2007. Political Game Theory: An Introduction. 
1st ed. Cambridge University Press. 
McCubbins, Matthew D., Roger G. Noll, and Barry R. Weingast. 1987. Administrative 
Procedures as Instruments of Political Control. Journal of Law and Economic Organiza- 
tion 3, no. 2 (January 1): 243-277. 
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria. 1995. The Disadvantage of Tying Their Hands: On the Polit- 
ical Economy of Policy Commitments. Economic Journal 105, no. 433 (November): 1381- 
1402. 
North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. Constitutions and Commitment: The 
Evolution of Institutional Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England. 
Journal of Economic History 49, no. 4 (December): 803-832. 
O’Donnell, Guillermo, Philippe C. Schmitter, and Laurence Whitehead. 1986. Transitions 
from Authoritarian Rule: Tentative Conclusions about Uncertain Democracies. Johns Hop- 
kins University Press. 
29 

========30========

Piott, Steven L. 2003. Giving Voters a Voice: The Origins of the Initiative and Refer- 
endum in America. University of Missouri Press. 
Przeworski, Adam. 1991. Democracy and the Market: Political and Economic Reforms in 
Eastern Europe. Cambridge University Press. 
Riker, William H. 1988. Liberalism Against Populism: A Confrontation Between the 
Theory of Democracy and the Theory of Social Choice. Waveland Press. 
Rogowski, Ronald. 1987. Trade and the Variety of Democratic Institutions. International 
Organization 41, no. 2 (Spring): 203-223. 
Rokkan, Stein. 1970. Citizens, Elections, Parties: Approaches to the Comparative Study 
of the Processes of Development. Imprint unknown. 
Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal. 1978. Political resource allocation, controlled 
agendas, and the status quo. Public Choice 33, no. 4 (Winter 1978): 27-43. 
Scarrow, Susan E. 1997. Party Competition and Institutional Change: The Expansion of 
Direct Democracy in Germany. Party Politics 3, no. 4 (October 1): 451-472. 
Schrag, Peter. 2004. Paradise Lost: California’s Experience, America’s Future. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Smith, Daniel A. and Dustin Fridkin. 2008. Delegating Direct Democracy: Interparty 
Legislative Competition and the Adoption of the Initiative in the American States. Amer- 
ican Political Science Review 102, no. 3: 333-350. 
Smith, Daniel A., and Joseph Lubinski. 2002. Direct Democracy During the Progressive 
Era: A Crack in the Populist Veneer. Journal of Policy History 14, no. 4: 349-83. 
Smith, Daniel A., and Caroline J. Tolbert. 2001. The Initiative to Party: Partisanship 
and Ballot Initiatives in California. Party Politics 7, no. 6 (November 1): 739-757. 
30 

========31========

