December 2010 
No.31 
International Trade without CES: Estimating Translog Gravity 
Dr Dennis Novy University of Warwick 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

International Trade without CES: Estimating Translog Gravity 
Dennis Novy* 
November 2010 
Abstract 
This paper derives a micro-founded gravity equation in general equilibrium based on a translog  demand system that allows for endogenous markups and substitution patterns across goods. In  contrast to standard CES-based gravity equations, trade is more sensitive to trade costs if the  exporting country only provides a small share of the destination country’s imports. As a result,  trade costs have a heterogeneous impact across country pairs, with some trade flows predicted to  be zero. I test the translog gravity equation and find strong empirical support in its favor.  
JEL classification:  F11, F12, F15 
Keywords:  Translog, Gravity, Trade Costs, Distance, Trade Cost Elasticity 
* 
University of Warwick, Department of Economics, Coventry CV4 7AL, United Kingdom and  CESifo, d.novy@warwick.ac.uk. I am very grateful for comments by Alberto Behar, Jeffrey  Bergstrand, Johannes Bröcker, Natalie Chen, Robert Feenstra, Ana Cecília Fieler, Kyle Handley,  Gordon Hanson, Christopher Meissner, Peter Neary, Krishna Pendakur, Joel Rodrigue, Alan  Taylor, Christian Volpe Martincus, David Weinstein and Adrian Wood. I am also grateful for  comments by seminar participants at the London School of Economics, Kiel, Loughborough,  Oxford, Valencia, Warwick, the 2010 CESifo Global Economy conference, the 2010  Econometric Society World Congress, the 2010 NBER Summer Institute and the 2010 Rocky  Mountain Empirical Trade conference. I gratefully acknowledge research support from the  Economic and Social Research Council, Grant RES-000-22-3112. 
1 

========2========

1. Introduction 
For decades, gravity equations have been used as a workhorse model of international  trade. They relate bilateral trade flows to country-specific characteristics of the exporters and  importers such as economic size, and to bilateral characteristics such as trade frictions between  the trading partners. A large body of empirical literature is devoted to understanding the impact  of trade frictions on international trade. The impact of distance and geography, currency unions,  free trade agreements and WTO membership have all been studied in great detail with the help of 
gravity equations. 
Theoretical foundations for gravity equations are manifold. In fact, various prominent  trade models of recent years predict gravity equations in equilibrium. These models include the  Ricardian framework by Eaton and Kortum (2002), the multilateral resistance framework by  Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), as well as the model with heterogeneous firms by Chaney  (2008). Likewise, Deardorff (1998) argues that a gravity equation also arises from a Heckscher- Ohlin framework where trade is driven by relative resource endowments.1 
A lthough the above trade models make different assumptions as to the motivation behind  
constant elasticity of substitution ( 
international trade, they  all use  
the demand side of the economy. N ot  least due to their  an enormously  useful tool and  have  had an  immense One common feature of  CES preferences is that they 
CES ) preferences to describe tractability , CES preferences have  proven  impact on the international trade literature .  translate  into a  constant elasticity of trade  
with respect to trade costs. This means that all else being equal, a reduction in trade costs – for  instance a uniform tariff cut – has the same proportionate effect on bilateral trade regardless of  whether tariffs were initially high or low or whether a country pair traded little or a lot. This is  true when the supply side is modeled as a Ricardian framework (Eaton and Kortum, 2002), as a  framework with heterogeneous firms (Chaney, 2008) or simply as an endowment economy  
(Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003). 
Yet, recent research has highlighted long-standing concerns over the CES demand  specification and the implied constant markups. Attention has been drawn to the idea that a  reduction in trade costs, for example through a free trade agreement or falling transportation  costs, may lead to an increase in competition and therefore lower markups. Melitz and Ottaviano  
                                                  
1 
Also see Bergstrand (1985). Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (2001) as well as Evenett and Keller (2002) also show  that various competing trade models lead to gravity equations. 
2 

========3========

preferences are more flexible in that 
allowing for richer  substitution patterns across varieties 
(2008) demonstrate this effect theoretically. Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) provide theory as  well as evidence for the US. Badinger (2007) as well as Chen, Imbs and Scott (2009) provide evidence for European countries. This line of research emphasizes more flexible demand systems  and variable markups that respond to changes in the competitive environment. 
In this paper, I adopt such a demand system and argue that it is fundamental to  understanding the trade cost elasticity. In particular, in section 2 I depart from the constant  elasticity gravity model and derive a gravity equation from homothetic translog preferences in a  general equilibrium framework. Translog preferences were introduced by Christensen, Jorgenson  and Lau (1975) in a closed-economy study of consumer demand.2 In contrast to CES, translog  
they yield endogenous markups and price elasticities, 
. When more goods are available for  
consumers to choose from, markups are lower and price elasticities are higher. This flexibility  
3 
In stead, t he effect of trade frictions  
across country pairs 
. D espite this  
varies , depending on how intensely two countries trade with each other. Trade  
-impeding impact 
ity, t he  resulting translog gravity equation is parsimonious and easy to  
breaks the constant link between trade flows and trade costs. on trade flows  
frictions therefore have a heterogeneous trade increase in complex 
implement with data. 
In s ection 3,  I attempt to  empirically  constant 
evidence against the constant elasticity specification.  
distinguish  elasticity specification. Based on trade flows amongst OECD countries,  
translog gravity  from  the traditional  
I find strong  The results demonstrate that ‘one-size-fits- 
all’ trade cost elasticities as implied by CES preferences are not supported by the data. Instead,  consistent with translog gravity, I find that the trade cost elasticity increases in absolute size, the  less concentrated trade is between two countries. That is, all else being equal, bilateral trade is  more sensitive to trade costs if the exporting country provides a smaller share of the destination  
                                                  
preferences have CES a constant tra 
Behrens, Mion, Murata and S a constant trade cost elasticity. The co 
2 
Recent applications of the translog framework include Feenstra and Weinstein (2010) who are concerned with  estimating the welfare gains from increased variety through globalization, Feenstra and Kee (2008) who estimate the  effect of expanding export variety on productivity, as well as Bergin and Feenstra (2009) who estimate exchange  rate pass-through. More generally, the translog functional form has been used widely in other fields, for example in  the productivity literature. See Christensen, Jorgenson and Lau (1971) for an early reference. 
3 
Although Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) work with quadratic preferences at the individual product level, their  
-like characteristics at the aggregate level in the sense that their gravity equation also features  
de cost elasticity. It has a zero income elasticity although population can be a demand shifter. Also see  
üdekum (2009) for a model with non 
-homothetic preferences and variable markups but  
nstant trade cost elasticity is also a feature of the ‘generalized gravity  equation’ based on the nested Cobb-Douglas/CES/Stone-Geary utility function in Bergstrand (1989). See Markusen  (1986) for an additional specification with non-homothetic preferences. 
3 

========4========

country’s imports. An implication is that a given trade cost change, for instance a reduction of  trade barriers through a free trade agreement, has a heterogeneous impact across country pairs.  The translog gravity framework can therefore shed new light on the effect of institutional  arrangements such as free trade agreements or WTO membership on international trade. For  example, it can help explain why trade liberalizations often lead to relatively larger trade creation  amongst country pairs that previously traded relatively little.4 
Although not explored in this paper, another  potentially useful  feature of the translog  demand system  is that it is in principle consistent  with zero  demand . It is well -known that zeros  are widespread in large samples of aggre gate bilateral trade, and even more so in samples at the  
disaggregated level.  If bilateral trade costs are sufficiently high, the corresponding import share  
in translog gravity  is zero. This feature is a straightforward implication of the fact that the pri ce  elasticity of demand is increasing in price and thus increasing in variable trade costs. In contrast,  
a CES -based demand system is not consistent with zero trade flows unless fixed costs of  
exporting are assumed on the supply side (see Helpman, Melitz a nd Rubinstein, 2008). 
The paper builds on the  gravity framework by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003), but  
instead of CES it relies on the homothetic translog demand system  employed by Feenstra (2003).  Another r elated paper in the literature is by Gohin and  Fém énia (2009) who develop a demand  
equation based on Deaton and Muellbauer’s (1980) almost ideal demand system and estimate it  with data on intra-European Union trade in cheese products. They also find evidence against the  restrictive assumptions underlying the CES-based gravity approach and stress the role of variable  price elasticities. But in contrast to my paper, they adopt a partial equilibrium approach and  abstract from trade costs. Volpe Martincus and Estevadeordal (2009) use a translog revenue  function to study specialization patterns in Latin American manufacturing industries in response  to trade liberalization policies, but they do not consider gravity equations. Lo (1990) models shopping travel behavior in a partial equilibrium spatial translog model with varying elasticities  of substitution across destination pairs. But her approach does not lead to a gravity equation. 
                                                  
4 
Komorovska, Kuiper and van Tongeren (2007) refer to the ‘small shares stay small’ problem as the inability of  CES-based demand systems to generate substantial trade creation in response to significant trade liberalization if  initial trade flows were small. In contrast, translog demand predicts large trade responses if initial flows were small.  Kehoe and Ruhl (2009) find evidence consistent with this prediction in an analysis of trade growth at the four-digit  industry level in the wake of the North American Free Trade Agreement and other major trade liberalizations. 
4 

========5========

2.  Translog Preferences and Trade Costs 
This section outlines the general equilibrium translog model and derives the theoretical  gravity equation based on an endowment economy framework. Following Diewert (1976) and  Feenstra (2003), I assume a translog expenditure function. As Bergin and Feenstra (2000) note,  the translog demand structure employed here is more concave than the CES. It can be  rationalized as a second-order approximation to an arbitrary expenditure system (see Diewert,  1976). 
I assume there are J countries in the world with j=1,…,J    and J ≥2. Each country is  endowed with at least one differentiated good but may have arbitrarily many, and the number of  goods may vary across countries.5 Let [ Nj-1+1,Nj] denote the range of goods of country j, with Nj-1≤ Nj and N0≡0. NJ≡N denotes the total number of goods in the world. The translog  expenditure function is given by 
N N N1 
(1) ln( ) ln( ) ln( ) ln( )ln( ),E U p p pj j j m mj km mj kj     0 
  
m m k  2 1 1 1 
where Uj is the utility level of country j with m and k indexing goods and γkm=γmk. The price of  good m when delivered in country j is denoted by pmj. I assume trade frictions such that  pmj=tmjpm, where pm denotes the net price for good m and tmj≥1 ∀ m,j is the variable trade cost  factor. I furthermore assume symmetry across goods from the same origin country i in the sense  that pm=pi if m ϵ [Ni-1+1,Ni], and that trade costs to country j are the same for all the goods from  origin country i, i.e., tmj=tij if m ϵ [Ni-1+1,Ni]. But I allow trade costs tij to be asymmetric for a  given country pair such that tij≠tji is possible. 
As in Feenstra (2003), to ensure an expenditure function with homogeneity of degree one  I impose the conditions: 
NN (2) 1, and 0.m km 
mk11 
In addition, I require that all goods enter‘symmetrically’ in the γkmcoefficients. Following  
Feenstra (2003), I therefore impose the additional restrictions: 
(3) ( 1) and with 0.  mm km       NNN m k m 
                                                  
5 
CES can be rationalized as an aggregator for a set of underlying goods so that the assumption of one differentiated  good per country as in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) is reasonable. However, that assumption would not be  harmless with translog demand. The number of goods is therefore allowed to vary across countries. 
5 

========6========

It can be easily verified that these additional restrictions satisfy the homogeneity condition in  (2).6 
The expenditure share  smj of country j for good m can be obtained by differentiating the  expenditure function (1) with respect to ln(pmj): 
N 
(4) ln( ).spmj m km kj 
k1 
Let xij denote the value of trade from country i to country j, and yj is the income of country j equal to expenditure Ej. The import share xij/yj is then the sum of expenditure shares smj over the  range of goods that originate from country i: 
NNiiN 
(5) ln( ) .xijy   spmj m km kj 
   
j m N m N k    ii111 1 1 
To close the model, I impose market clearing: 
J 
(6) .y x ii ij 
j1 
2.1. The Translog Gravity Equation 
To obtain the gravity equation, I substitute the import shares from equation (5) into the  market-clearing condition (6) to solve for the general equilibrium. Using pkj=tkjpk, I then solve  for the net prices pk and substitute them back into the import share (5). This solution procedure is  similar to the one adopted by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) for their CES-based model. The  Technical Appendix provides a detailed derivation. 
As the final result, I obtain a translog ‘gravity’ equation for import shares as 
(7) 
xij 
y 
 
j 
yi 
yW 
  n 
i 
ln(tij)  n 
i 
ln(Tj) 
n  
J 
y 
s 
i 
s 1 
y 
W 
ln  tis   
T 
 , 
s  
where  yW denotes world income, defined as yyW  
 
J 
j  1 
j 
, and n N Ni i i 
1 
denotes the  
number of goods of country  
i. The variable ln( )Tjis a weighted average of (logarithmic) trade  
costs over the trading partners of country jakin to inward multilateral resistance in Anderson and  van Wincoop (2003). As the Technical Appendix shows, it is given by 
                                                  
6 
The assumption of γ>0 ensures that the price elasticity of demand exceeds unity. The estimation results below  confirm this assumption. The elasticity is also increasing in price (see Feenstra, 2003). 
6 

========7========

NJ 
(8) ln( ) ln( ) ln( ).T t t1 NN 
nsj kj sj 
ks11 
Note that the last term on the right-hand side of equation (7) only varies acrossthe exporting  countries ibut not across the importing countries j. However, the third term on the right-hand  side of equation (7), nT, varies across 
ijln 
 
both. 
To be clear, I refer to expression(7)as a‘gravity’ equation although its appearance differs from traditional gravity equations in two respects. First, the left-hand side variable is the  import share xij/yj and not the bilateral trade flow xij. Second, the right-hand variables are not  multiplicatively linked. However, expression (7) and traditional gravity equations have in  common that they relate the extent of bilateral trade to both bilateral variables such as trade costs as well as to country-specific variables such as the exporter’s and importer’s incomes and  multilateral resistance. 
2.2. A Comparison to Gravity Equations with a Constant Trade Cost Elasticity 
The important feature of the translog gravity equation is that the import share on the left- hand side of equation (7) is specified in levels and not in logarithmic form, while logarithmic  trade costs appear on the right-hand side. This stands in contrast to ‘traditional’ gravity  equations. For example, Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) derive the following gravity  equation: 
(9) x 
ij 
 
y 
i 
yj  tij 
 
1 
y 
W 
i 
P 
, 
j 
where  Πi and Pj are outward and inward multilateral resistance variables, respectively, and ζ is  the elasticity of substitution from the CES utility function on which their model is based.7 To be  more easily comparable to the translog gravity equation (7), I div ide the standard gravity  
equation ( 9) by  yj and take logarithms to arrive at 
(10) 
ln 
x 
ij 
 
y 
j 
   ln 
y 
i  
 
y 
W 
 ( 
 1)ln(tij)( 
 1)ln( 
i)( 
 1)ln( 
Pj). 
Although the dependent variable of gravity equations in the literature is typically ln(xij) as  opposed to the logarithmic import share ln(xij/yj), I will nevertheless refer to the CES-based  
                                                  
7 
Note that in the absence of trade costs (tij=1∀i,j), the CES and translog gravity equations coincide as xij/yj=yi/yW. 
7 

========8========

gravity equation (10) as the ‘standard’ or ‘traditional’ specification as opposed to the translog  specification in equation (7). 
The log-linear form of equation (10) is the key difference to the translog gravity equation  (7). The log-linear form is also a feature of the Ricardian model by Eaton and Kortum (2002) as  well as the heterogeneous firms model by Chaney (2008).8 It implies a  trade cost elasticity η that  is constant, where η is defined as9 
(11) 
  
dln( xij / yj). 
dln(tij) 
Thus, the traditionalgravity equation (10) implies ηCES=-(ζ-1).10 
However,  translog gravity breaks this constant link between trade flows and trade costs.  The translog (TL) trade cost elasticity follows from equation (7) as 
(12)  
TL ij 
 ni /( 
xij / 
yj). 
It thus varies across observations. Specifically, ceteris paribus the absolute value of the elasticity,  
TL 
ij 
, decreases as the import share grows larger. Intuitively, given the size yj of the importing  
country and the number of exported goods ni, a large trade flow xij means that the exporting  country enjoys a relatively powerful market position. Demand for the exporter’s goods is  buoyant, and consumers do not react strongly to price changes induced by changes in trade costs.  On the contrary, a small trade flow xij means that demand for an exporting country’s goods is  weak, and consumers are sensitive to price changes. As a result, small exporters are hit harder by  rising trade costs and find it more difficult to defend their market share. 
3.  Estimation  
In this section, I first estimate a translog gravity regression as derived in equation (7), and  separately I also estimate a traditional gravity regression as in equation (10). I then proceed to  
                                                  
8 
These models employ a CES preference structure. The trade cost coefficient in Eaton and Kortum (2002) is  governed by the technology parameter θ, which is the shape parameter from the underlying Fréchet distribution. The  trade cost elasticities in Chaney (2008) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) are governed by the parameter that  determines the degree of firm heterogeneity, drawn from a Pareto distribution. Other differences include, for  instance, the presence of bilateral fixed trade costs in the Chaney gravity equation. 
9 
The elasticity  η as defined here focuses on the direct effect of tij on xij/yj. It abstracts from the indirect effect of tij on xij/yj through the multilateral resistance terms. These are general equilibrium effects that operate in both the CES  and the translog frameworks. See section 3.5 for a discussion. 
10 
The gravity equation by Eaton and Kortum (2002) implies  ηEK=-θ. Likewise, the gravity equations by Chaney  (2008) and Melitz and Ottaviano (2008) also imply a constant trade cost elasticity, given by the Pareto shape  parameter. 
8 

========9========

econometrically discriminate the two models by testing the hypothesis whether the trade cost  elasticity is constant (as predicted by the traditional gravity model) or variable (as predicted by  the translog gravity model). 
3.1.  Data 
I use exports amongst 28 OECD countries for the year 2000, sourced from the IMF  Direction of Trade Statistics and denominated in US dollars. These include all OECD countries  except for the Czech Republic and Turkey. The maximum number of bilateral observations is  28*27=756, but seven are missing so that the sample includes 749 observations in total.11 Income  data  for the year 2000  are taken from the  IMF International Financial Statistics. 
I follow the gravity literature by modeling the trade cost factor  tij as a log-linear function  of observable trade cost proxies (see Anderson and van Wincoop, 2003 and 2004). For the baseline specification, I use bilateral great-circle distance distij between capital cities as the sole  trade cost proxy, taken from www.indo.com/distance. For other specifications I add an adjacency  dummy adjij that takes on the value one if countries i and j share a land border. The trade cost  function can thus be written as 
(13) ln(tij) 
  ln( 
distij) 
 adjij, 
where ρ denotes the distance elasticity of trade costs and δ is the adjacency coefficient. Since  distance and adjacency do not vary over time, the focus is on cross-sectional variation in trade  costs. 
To estimate the translog gravity equation (7), I also require data on ni, the number of  goods that originate from country i. Naturally, such data are not easy to measure and the theory  does not provide guidance as to how it should be measured. However, Hummels and Klenow  (2005) construct a measure of the extensive margin across countries based on shipments in more  than 5,000 six-digit product categories from 126 exporting countries to 59 importing countries  for the year 1995. The extensive margin is measured by weighting categories of goods by their  overall importance in exports, consistent with the methodology developed by Feenstra (1994). Their Table A1 reports the extensive margin of country i relative to the rest of the world. I use  
                                                  
11 
The countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary,  Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland,  Portugal, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. As some  data for the Czech Republic and Turkey were missing, these countries were dropped from the sample. 
9 

========10========

this fraction as a proxy for ni. Hummels and Klenow (2005) document that the extensive margin  tends to be larger for big countries. For example, the extensive margin measure is 0.91 for the  United States, 0.79 for Germany and 0.72 for Japan but only 0.05 for Iceland. 
As an alternative, I construct an additional measure of the extensive margin. Instead of  the weighting scheme used by Hummels and Klenow (2005), I devise an unweighted count of  six-digit product categories. The correlation between the two measures stands at 77 percent. As a  robustness check, I use this alternative measure in the regressions that correspond to those  described below, and the results are qualitatively very similar.12 
3.2.  Estimating Translog Gravity 
The first and last terms on the right-hand side of equation (7) can be captured by an  exporter fixed effect Si since they do not vary over the importing country j: 
Si 
yi 
i  
J 
 
ys 
yW 
n 
W 
lny 
 
s1 
th is  exporter fixed effect  
tis  T 
.s 
 
I substitute 
in to equation ( 
7 ) to  obtain 
(14) 
x 
y 
ij 
 ni ln(tij) 
ni ln(Tj) 
Si 
ij, 
j 
where Ialso add a mean-zero error term εij. Then I substitute the trade cost function (13) into the  multilateral resistance term (8). This yields 
ln(Tj) 
  ln( 
Tdistj ) 
 Tadjj , 
wheretheterms on the right-hand side are defined as 
(15) 
 
J 
ln( Tdistj )  
s1 Using the trade cost function (1 as 
ns N 
ln( 
distsj) and T 
 
J adj j 
 
s1 
n s N 
adjsj. 
3) once  again for ln( 
tij), the translog estimating equation follows  
(16) 
x 
y 
ij 
 ni ln( 
distij) 
ni ln( 
Tdistj ) 
n 
i 
adjij 
n 
i 
Tadj 
j 
 Si 
ij. 
j 
                                                  
12 
I use UN Comtrade bilateral export data at the six-digit level for the year 2000 (HS 1996 classification). I exclude  very small bilateral trade flows (those with values below 10,000 US dollars) since those tend to disappear frequently  from one year to the next. Following Hummels and Klenow (2005), I normalize the extensive margin measure by  constructing it relative to the total number of six-digit product categories that exist across all countries (5130  categories). This alternative measure is 0.99 for the US, 0.95 for Germany, 0.89 for Japan and 0.10 for Iceland. 
10 

========11========

I construct the explanatory variables n disti ij ln( ) and n adj 
i ij 
by multiplying the underlying trade  
cost variablesby the extensive margin proxyni taken from Hummels and Klenow (2005). The  ln( Tdistj ) and T 
adj 
j 
terms are constructed for each country j according to equation (15) and then  
multiplied by the extensive margin proxy ni. 
Table 1 presents the regression results. Column 1 estimates equation (16) with bilateral  distance as the only trade cost proxy. As expected, import shares tend to be significantly lower  for more distant country pairs. Column 2 adds the adjacency dummy. As typically found in  gravity estimations, this variable is positive and significant. The coefficients of the individual  regressors and the corresponding multilateral resistance regressors are similar in magnitude as  predicted by estimating equation (16). For example, the distance coefficient in column 1 is  estimated at -0.0296, whereas the corresponding trade cost index term is 0.0207. These two  values are reasonably close in absolute magnitude, although a formal test of their equality is  rejected (p-value=0.00). However, for the two adjacency regressors in column 2 a test of their  equality in absolute magnitude cannot be rejected (p-value=0.81). 
As an additional check, I adopt a related estimating equation where the dependent  variable is the import share xij/yj divided by the extensive margin measure ni for the exporting  country. The resulting variable can be interpreted as the average import share per good of the  exporting country. From equation (16) I obtain 
(17) 
xij / y ni 
j 
  ln( 
distij) 
adjij 
 Sˆi 
 Sˆj 
ij, 
where ij denotes the error term. The exporter fixed effect Sˆi  
S 
i 
/ni now absorbs the extensive  
margin measure ni, and the multilateral resistance terms associated with distance and adjacency  can be captured by an importer fixed effect Sˆ 
j 
given by 
Sˆj 
 ln( 
Tdistj ) 
Tadjj . 
The regression results are reported in columns 3 and 4. As before, distance enters with the  expected negative coefficient and adjacency with a positive coefficient.As a final check, in  columns 5 and 6 I make the simplifying assumption that each country is endowed with only one  
11 

========12========

good (ni=1 ∀ i).13 Naturally, the magnitudes of the coefficients shift but the y retain the ir signs  and significance. O verall, g iven the  sizeable degree of  explanatory power of the regressions with  an  R -squared of 50 percent or more , I conclude that the translog gravit y equation passes its first  test of being rea sonable. 
Apart from translog gravity, I also estimate the standard gravity specification. I substitute  
the trade cost function (13) into equation (10) to arrive at the estimating equation for ‘traditional’  gravity: 
(18)  
ln 
x 
ij 
 
yj 
 
  (  1) ln( distij)  (  1) adj 
ij 
 S~ 
i 
 S~ 
j 
ij, 
 
whereI add an error term ξij.14 S~ 
i 
and S~j are exporter and importer fixed effects defined as 
S~ 
y 
i 
i 
 ln 
 
y 
W 
(  1)ln( i), 
 
S~ 
j 
 (  1)ln( Pj). 
The logarithmic form of the dependent variable is the key difference to the translog specification  in equation (16). 
Regressionresults for equation (18) are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 2. As  typical,bilateraldistance is negatively related to import shares with a coefficient in the vicinity  of -1, whereas adjacency is associated with higher shares. For completeness, in columns 3 and 4  I change the dependent variable to the log import share per good of the exporting country,  ln((xij/yj)/ni)). The measure for ni is entirely absorbed by the exporter fixed effects so that the  coefficients of interests and their standard errors remain the same. Consistent with the gravity  literature, the log-linear regressions in Table 2 have a high explanatory power with R-squareds close to 90 percent.15 
                                                  
13 
Alternatively, I could also set ni=n where n is any arbitrary positive integer. Since the regression is linear, the  estimated coefficients would simply be scaled by the factor 1/n. 
14 
An estimating equation based on the Eaton and Kortum (2002) model would merely replace  ζ-1 by θ. Here, the  crucial feature is that the trade cost elasticity is constant. This feature would also arise for the other gravity models  mentioned above. 
15 
Although the R -squareds associated with the regressions in Table 1 are around 55 percent and thus lower, they are  
not directly comparable to those in Table  2 because the dependent variables  are not the same . 
12 

========13========

3.3.  Testing Traditional vs. Translog Gravity 
The next objective is to test translog gravity against the traditional gravity specification.  The test centers on the question of whether the trade cost elasticity is constant. As equation (12)  shows, translog gravity implies that the absolute value of the trade cost elasticity decreases in the  import share per good, i.e., 
  
TL 
ij 
xij / yj  
 0. 
 
ni 
 
  
In contrast, standard gravity equations imply a constant trade cost elasticity. I form two  hypotheses, A and B, to test whether the elasticity is indeed constant. Hypothesis A is based on  the standard gravity estimation as in equation (18), while hypothesis B is based on the translog  gravity estimation as in equation (17). 
The premiseof hypothesis A is that the standard gravity model is correct and that trade  cost elasticities should not vary systematically. To implement this test, I allow the trade cost  coefficients in the traditional specification(18) to vary across import sharesper good. Since  estimating a separate distance coefficient for each observation would leave no degrees of  freedom, I allow the distance coefficient to vary over intervals of import shares per good. That is,  I set the distance coefficient for observation ij equal to λh if this observation falls in the hth  interval with h=1,...,H. H denotes the interval with the largest import shares per good, and the  number of intervals is sufficiently small to leave enough degrees of freedom in the estimation. I  also add interval fixed effects. For simplicity, I drop the adjacency dummy from the notation so  that the estimating equation becomes 
(19) 
ln 
x 
ij 
 
 
y 
 h ln( distij)  S~ 
i 
 S~ 
j 
 S~ 
h 
ij, 
j 
 
where S~h denotes the interval fixed effectand ωij is an error term. Hypothesis A states – as  
predicted by the traditional gravity model – that the λh distance coefficients should not vary  across import share intervals, i.e., λ1= λ2=...=λH. The alternative is – as predicted by the translog  gravity model – that the λh distance coefficients should vary systematically across intervals as  implied by equation (12). Specifically, the absolute elasticity should decrease across the  intervals, i.e., λ1> λ2>...> λH. 
13 

========14========

How exactly should the intervals be chosen? If the intervals were chosen based on  observed values for import shares, this selection would be based on the dependent variable and  would lead to an endogeneity bias in the coefficients of interest, λh. More specifically, I carried  out Monte Carlo simulations demonstrating that this selection procedure would lead to an  upward bias in the distance coefficients (i.e., λh coefficients closer to zero) since both the  dependent variable and the interval classification would be positively correlated with the error  term.16 
The endogeneity bias can be avoided if intervals are chosen based on  predicted import shares. In particular, I first estimate equation (18) and obtain trade cost coefficients that are  common across all observations. Based on those regression results I then predict import shares  and divide the sample into H intervals of predicted import shares. By construction, this interval  classification is uncorrelated with the residuals of regression (18). Monte Carlo simulations  confirm that with this two-stage procedure, estimating equation (19) no longer imparts a bias on  the λh coefficients. 
Table 3 presents regression results for equation (19) under the assumption of H=5, i.e.,  with five import share intervals. Consistent with equation (12), the intervals in columns 1-4 are  chosen based on predicted import shares per good, (xij/yj)/ni. Like in Table 2, columns 3 and 4  only differ from the previous two in that they use the import share per good as the dependent  variable. But due to the log-linearity the measure for ni is absorbed by the exporter fixed effects  such that the coefficients of interest and their standard errors are not affected, only the R - squared. Nevertheless, I report the results for completeness. As a robustness check,  the intervals  in columns 5 and 6 are chosen based on predicted import shares only,  xij/yj. 
Columns 1, 3 and 5 report results with distance as the only trade cost regressor. A clear  pattern arises: the λh distance coefficients decline in absolute value for intervals with larger  import shares, as predicted by the translog model. For example, in column 1 the distance  elasticity for the smallest import shares is -1.496 whereas it shrinks in magnitude to -1.079 for  
                                                  
16 
I simulated import shares under the assumption that the Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) gravity equation (10)  is the true model, using distance as the trade cost proxy based on the trade cost function (13) and assuming various  arbitrary parameter values for the distance elasticity ρ and the elasticity of substitution ζ. The variance of the log- normal error term was chosen to match the R-squared of around 90 percent as in Table 2. I then divided the sample  into intervals based on the simulated import shares and ran regression (19) with OLS, replicating this procedure  1000 times. The resulting bias can be severe, in some cases halving the magnitudes of coefficients compared to their  true values.  
14 

========15========

the largest import shares. Hypothesis A, which states that the distance coefficients are equal to  each other, can be clearly rejected (p-value=0.01 in columns 1 and 3, p-value=0.00 in column 5). 
Columns 2, 4 and 6 add adjacency. Since no adjacent country pair in the sample falls into  the interval capturing the smallest predicted import shares, the corresponding regressor drops  out. The addition of the adjacency dummies does not alter the pattern of distance coefficients.  Those still decline monotonically in magnitude across all specifications and their equality can be  rejected (p-value=0.00 in columns 2, 4 and 6). There is no such monotonic pattern for the  adjacency coefficients, but their point estimates for intervals 2 and 3 are substantially larger than  those for intervals 4 and 5.17 Overall,  their equality can be clearly rejected in columns 2 and 4 (p - value= 0.00 ) although not in column 6 ( p-val ue= 0.34 ). But the specifications in columns 2 and 4  
are prefer able since those are based on intervals of predicted import shares per good, as  
warranted by equation (12). 
I also experimented with different numbers of intervals, in particular  H=3 and H=10 (not  reported here). The results are not qualitatively affected and the same coefficient patterns arise as  in Table 3. This suggests that the systematic inequality of trade cost elasticities across import  share intervals is a robust feature of the data. In summary, therefore, the results provide evidence  against the constant elasticity gravity specification and in favor of the translog gravity model. 
Hypothesis B is based on the translog gravity estimating equation (17). Its premise is that the translog specification is correct and that trade cost coefficients in that estimation should not  vary systematically across import shares. I adopt the same strategy as above in that I allow the  trade cost coefficients to vary across intervals h=1,...,H of import shares per good, also adding interval fixed effects. For simplicity, I again drop the adjacency variable from the notation so  that the estimating equation becomes 
(20) 
xij / y 
j 
ni 
 h ln( distij)  Sˆi  Sˆj  Sˆh ij, 
whereκh denotes the trade cost coefficients, Sˆ 
h 
denotes the interval fixed effect and υij is an  
error term. Hypothesis B states – as predicted by the translog gravity model – that the κh distance  coefficients should not vary across intervals of import shares per good, i.e., κ1= κ2=...=κH. The  
                                                  
17 
A clear monotonic pattern for the adjacency coefficients does emerge in columns 2 and 4 of Table 3 if the  alternative, unweighted measure is used for the extensive margin ni (see section 3.1). 
15 

========16========

As with  chosen based on  
hypothesis A 
alternative is – as implied by the standard gravity model – that the magnitude of the κh distance  coefficients should increase in the import share per good.18 
, one needs to be careful in constructing the intervals. If they were  
observed values of import shares per good, one would incur an upward  endogeneity bias in the coefficients of interest, κh. But this bias can be avoided if one first  estimates equation (17) to obtain common trade cost coefficients, predicts the corresponding  import shares and then divides the sample into H intervals of predicted import shares per good.I  verified the validity of this estimation strategy with Monte Carlo simulations.19 
Table  4a presents regression results for equation  
(20 ) under the assumption of  
H=5, i.e.,  
fifth interval,  no longer  
with five import share intervals. In column 1 where distance is the only trade cost regressor, the  distance coefficients appear to generally rise in magnitude across import shares and the  hypothesis that they are equal can be rejected (p-value=0.00). However, this rejection is driven  by the coefficient for the first interval (equal to -0.0449), which deviates most from the other  coefficients. Indeed, the hypothesis that the coefficients for intervals 2-5 are equal cannot be  rejected (p-value=0.44). Neither can the hypothesis of equality between all distance coefficients  be rejected when I rerun regression (20) with more intervals.20 
In column 2, I add adjacency. Since all adjacent country pairs in the sample fall into the  
other intervals drop out.  
obtain  a monotonic pattern of distance coefficients. In fact, the point estimates for  
intervals 4 and 5 are smaller in magnitude than for interval 3, and they are not statis 
. This evidence  
the adjacenc 
y variables for the  
different from each other distance coefficients  
(p -value=0.69) that  one would expect  
under the  
                                         
         
distance elasticity  
With adjacency included, I  
tically  
is inconsistent with the pattern of  constant elasticity gravity m 
odel . 
18 
To see this, divide the constant elasticity gravity equation (9) by yj and take the derivative with respect to ln(tij).  The result is d(xij/yj)/d ln(tij)=-(ζ-1)xij/yj, implying that the absolute value of this derivative is increasing in xij/yj. In  the translog gravity equation (7), this derivative is given by d(xij/yj)/d ln(tij)=-γni. If constant elasticity gravity were  the true specification, then γni should also be increasing in xij/yj, or equivalently γ should be increasing in (xij/yj)/ni.  Thus, in equation (20) the κh distance coefficients should be increasing in (xij/yj)/ni.19 
I simulated import shares under the assumption that the translog gravity equation (7) is the true model, using  
distance as the trade cost proxy based on the trade cost function (13) and assuming various arbitrary values for the  
ρ and the translog parameter γ. The variance of the error term was chosen to match the R-squared  of around 55 percent as in Table 1. I divided the sample into intervals based on either the simulated import shares or  predicted import shares from a first-stage regression of equation (17). I then ran regression (20) with both types of  intervals, replicating this procedure 1000 times. Forming intervals based on the simulated import shares leads to a  severe upward bias in the κh coefficients.20 
For example, with  H=10 the test of coefficient equality cannot be rejected (p-value=0.24). 
16 

========17========

In Table 4b I present corresponding results based on equation (16) with xij/yj as the  dependent variable. Multilateral resistance terms now appear as regressors. As in Table 4a, in  columns 1 and 2 intervals are chosen based on predicted import shares per good. As a robustness  check, the intervals in columns 3 and 4 are chosen based on predicted import shares only. Distance is the only trade cost regressor in columns 1 and 3. Adjacency is added in columns 2  and 4. 
As noted above, if gravity with a constant elasticity were the true underlying model, one  should observe a monotonic increase in the absolute distance coefficients across the intervals.  However, such a pattern is generally not supported by the estimations. For example, in column 1  the distance coefficient for the first interval (equal to -0.0535) is larger in absolute size than  those for intervals 2 and 3 but smaller than those for intervals 4 and 5. In column 2 the smallest  distance coefficient is associated with the second interval (equal to -0.0351); in column 3 the  smallest coefficient is for the fourth interval (equal to -0.0332); in column 4 the smallest  coefficient is for the second interval (equal to -0.0327). Nevertheless, formal tests of coefficient  equality across intervals (i.e., hypothesis B) can still be rejected because the coefficients are  tightly estimated. 
Overall, the results in Tables 3, 4a and 4b appear inconsistent with coefficient patterns  one should expect under the constant elasticity gravity model. They instead support the  predictions of the translog gravity model. However, as a matter of careful interpretation, the  empirical results should first and foremost be seen as evidence against CES rather than in favor  of translog. Although consistent with the translog gravity model, of course the results logically  do not preclude the possibility of an alternative third model that performs even better than  translog. Nevertheless, the translog specification indicates the direction in which the demand side  of trade models could sensibly be modified to yield gravity equations with varying trade cost  elasticities. 
3.4.  Discussion 
The crucial result from the preceding gravity estimations is that a constant ‘one-size-fits- all’ trade cost elasticity is inconsistent with the data. Instead, the trade cost elasticities vary with  the import share, as predicted by translog gravity. What are the implied values for these  elasticities? This question can be answered by considering the  elasticity expression in equation  
17 

========18========

(12). The elasticities ηij depend on the translog parameter γ, the import share xij/yj and the number  
of goods of the exporting country ni. 
The values for xij/yj and ni are given by the data, and the translog parameter γ can be  retrieved from the estimated distance coefficient in a translog regression. As the translog  estimating equation (16) shows, the coefficient on the variable ni ln(distij) corresponds to the  product of the translog parameter γ and the distance elasticity of trade costs ρ. As an illustration,  I take 0.0296 from column 1 of Table 1 as an absolute value for this coefficient, i.e., γρ=0.0296.  To be comparable to the gravity literature, I choose a value of ρ that is consistent with typical  estimates. Specifically, in standard gravity equations based on equation (18), the distance  coefficient corresponds to the parameter combination -(ζ-1)ρ. It is typically estimated to be  around -1 (see Disdier and Head, 2008), and in column 1 of Table 2 I obtain a reasonably close  estimate of -1.239 for my sample of OECD countries. Under the assumption of an elasticity of  substitution equal to ζ=8, which falls approximately in the middle of the range [5,10] as  surveyed by Anderson and van Wincoop (2004), the distance coefficient estimate implies  
ρ=1.239/(8-1)=0.177.21 The value of the translog parameter To be clear about my approach, I only choose a value of  
then  follows  as  γ=0.0296/ρ=0.167.22 ρ for illustrative purposes. The analysis  
percent. This value is close to the CES 
below does not qualitatively depend on this particular value. 
The trade cost elasticities can now be calculated across different import shares. I first  calculate the trade cost elasticity evaluated at the average import share in the sample. This  average share is xij/yj=0.01. The average of the extensive margin measure is ni=0.50.The trade  cost elasticity therefore follows as ηij =-γni /(xij/yj)=-0.167*0.50/0.01=-8.4.23 Thus, if trade costs  go down by one percent, ceteris paribus the average import share is expected to increase by 8.4  
-based trade cost elasticity,  
under the assumption of ζ=8. For alternative values of ζ it is also true that the translog trade cost  
                                                  
ηCES=-(ζ-1), which equals 7  
21 
See Anderson and van Wincoop (2004, Figure 1) for further evidence that ρ=0.177 is a reasonable value. 
22 
Based on an estimation of supply and demand systems at the 4 yield a median translog coefficient of  
23 
The extensive margin measure taken from Hum 
-digit industry le 
vel, Feenstra and Weinstein (2010)  
γ=0.19. My value of γ=0.167 is reasonably close and would match Feenstra  and Weinstein’s (2010) estimate exactly in the case of ρ=0.156. 
mels and Klenow (2005) more closely corresponds to the fraction  
ni/N since they report the extensive margin of country i relative to the rest of the world. However, this does not  affect the implied trade cost elasticities. The reason is that the elasticities as expressed in equation (12) depend on  the product γni. If ni is multiplied by a constant (1/N), the linear estimation in regression (16) leads to a point  estimate of γ that is scaled up by the inverse of the constant (N) so that their product is not affected (Nγ*ni /N = γni). 
18 

========19========

elasticity evaluated at the average import share is close to the underlying CES-based trade cost  elasticity.24 
However, in contrast to the CES specificat ion, the trade cost elasticities based on the  
translog gravity estimation vary across import shares. A given trade cost reduction therefore has  
a heterogeneous impact on import shares. As an example, I illustrate this heterogeneity with  
import shares that  involve New Zealand as the importing country. I choose New Zealand because  
its import shares vary across a relatively broad range so that the heterogeneity of trade cost  
elasticities can be demonstrated succinctly. O f course, the analysis would be qualitatively similar  
for other importing countries. The Australian share of New Zealand’s imports is the biggest (7.2  percent), followed by the US share (3.8 percent), the Japanese share (2.4 percent) and the UK  share (0.9 percent). 
The corresponding trade cost elasticities, computed in the same way as before, are -1.3  for Australia, -4.0 for the US, -5.0 for Japan and -14.4 for the UK. Figure 1 plots these trade cost  elasticitiesin absolute value against the import shares, adding various additional countries that  export to New Zealand.25 Dotted lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals computed with  
the delt a method based on the regression in column 1 of Table 1. The figure shows that trade  
flows are more sensitive to trade costs if import shares are small. The impact of a given trade  
cost change is therefore heterogeneous across country pairs. This key featu re stands in contrast to  the trade cost elasticity in the standard CES -based gravity model where it is simply a constant 
(ζ-1=7 in this case). 
3.5.  General Equilibrium Effects  
The trade cost elasticity η as defined in equation (11) focuses on the direct impact of a  change in trade costs tij on the import share xij/yj. However, it does not take into account the  indirect impact of a trade cost change through general equilibrium effects, as forcefully  demonstrated by Anderson and van Wincoop (2003). To illustrate the role of general  equilibrium, I decompose how import shares are affected by the direct and indirect effects and  how this decomposition varies across import share intervals. But as I clarify further below,  
                                                  
24 
For instance, under the assumption of ζ=5, it follows ρ=0.31 and γ=0.095 so that the trade cost elasticity evaluated  at the average import share is -4.8. Under the assumption of ζ=10, it follows ρ=0.138 and γ=0.214 so that the trade  cost elasticity is -10.7. 
25 
In order of declining import shares, the other countries are Ge rmany, Italy, Korea and France. 
19 

========20========

general equilibrium effects are not able to explain the pattern of declining distance coefficients as  found in Table 3. 
I demonstrate the role of general equilibrium effects based on the constant elasticity  gravity model in equation (10). As a simplification I assume trade cost symmetry such that  outward and inward multilateral resistance terms are equal (Πi = Pi ∀ i). As a counterfactual  experiment, I will assume a reduction in trade costs tij for a specific country pair. To understand  the effect on the import share, I take the first difference of equation (10) to arrive at 
ln 
(21) 
x 
ij 
 
 
y 
 (1 )ln(tij) ln 
 y 
i 
 
j 
 
 
 1)ln( PPj). 
 
y 
W ( i 
The left-hand side of equation (21) indicates the percentage change of the import share. It can be  decomposed into three components. The first termon the right-hand sideis the direct effect of  the change in bilateral trade costs scaled by(1-ζ). The second and third terms are the general  equilibrium effects, i.e., the change in the exporting country’s income share and most  importantly the change in multilateral resistance terms scaled by (ζ-1). 
I am interested in how the decomposition in equation (21) varies across import shares. To  that end, I first compute an initial equilibrium of trade flows based on the income data for the  year 2000 and bilateral distance data for the 28 countries in the sample. Then, for each of the  28*27=756 bilateral observations I compute a counterfactual equilibrium under the assumption  that all else being equal, bilateral trade costs for that observation have decreased by one percent, i.e., Δln(tij)=-0.01, assuming an elasticity of substitution of ζ=8. I use the trade cost function (13)  with distance as the only trade cost variable, assuming a distance elasticity of ρ =1/7.26 
Table 5 presents the  decomposition  results that correspond to equation (21). The rows  report the average  changes for each import share interval. Given the parameter assumption  of  ζ=8, the direct effect of a one percent drop in bilateral trade costs is an increase in the import  share of seven percent across all intervals (see column 2). While changes in the income shares in  column 3 do not vary systematically across import shares, the multilateral resistance effects in  column 4 are largest in absolute size for the interval capturing the largest import shares. In total,  
                                                  
26 
The counterfactual equilibria are computed in the same way as in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003, Appendix  B). The required domestic distance data are taken from the CEPII, see 
http://www.cepii.fr/anglaisgraph/bdd/distances.htm. This distance elasticity is close to the value chosen in section  3.4 for illustrative purposes. The results are qualitatively not sensitive to alternative values. I also experimented with  alternative parameter assumptions for the substitution elasticity (ζ=5 and ζ=10) and different trade cost declines (5  percent and 10 percent). The overall results are qualitatively very similar. 
20 

========21========

the general equilibrium effects dampen the direct effect for larger import shares (see the total  effect in column 1). Intuitively, large countries like Japan and the US are less dependent on  international trade such that changes in bilateral trade costs have little effect on multilateral  resistance. As large countries are typically associated with small import shares, the indirect  general equilibrium effects are often negligible for small import shares. However, for small  countries like Iceland and Luxembourg a given change in bilateral trade costs shifts multilateral  resistance relatively strongly. As those countries are typically associated with larger import  shares, general equilibrium effects tend to be stronger in that case so that the total effect is  dampened. The trade cost elasticities in columns 5a and 5b summarize these effects. Columns 6a  and 6b report the implied distance elasticities. From equation (18) the direct distance elasticity is  simply given by -(ζ-1)ρ, which equals -1 in this case. 
It is important to stress that the distance elasticities in Tables 2 and 3 only represent the direct elasticities. General equilibrium effects work in addition to the direct effect and are  absorbed by exporter and importer fixed effects. To verify this claim, I conduct Monte Carlo  simulations as in section 3.3 for the constant elasticity model. The simulations are now based on  the counterfactual scenario that all bilateral trade costs decline by one percent, leaving domestic distances unchanged. Thus, the simulated import shares are shifted by both direct and indirect  effects. I then re-estimate gravity regression (19), dividing the sample into five import share  intervals and allowing the distance elasticities to vary across these intervals. The results show  that the distance coefficients are consistently estimated as the parameter combination -(ζ-1)ρ across all five intervals. They do not reflect general equilibrium effects. Thus, general  equilibrium effects cannot account for the systematic pattern of distance elasticities reported in  Table 3. 
3.6.  Alternative Trade Cost Functions 
The log-linear trade cost function (13) is the standard specification in the gravity  literature. However, I also examine other specifications to ensure that the coefficient patterns in  the regression tables do not hinge on this particular functional form. 
In the CES-based gravity regressions of Table 3, larger import shares are characterized by  smaller distance coefficients in absolute size. As larger import shares are typically found at  shorter distances, a conceivable explanation could be that shorter distances are associated with a  
21 

========22========

smaller distance elasticity of trade costs, whereas the trade cost function (13) imposes a constant  distance elasticity of trade costs due to its log-linear form. As an alternative, I consider a trade  cost function that implies a smaller distance elasticity of trade costs at shorter distances: 
(22) ln(tij) 
 ˆ[ln( 
distij)]2, 
where  
ˆ is a parameter to be estimated.  
Logarithmic trade costs are thus convex in logar 
ithmic  
distance.  I also consider  the opposite case of a concave t rade cost function. In particular, I adopt  
a specification  in which the level of trade costs depends on logarithmic distance , or equivalently:  
(23) ln(tij)  ~ln[ln( distij)], 
where ~ is a parameter. This concave specification captures the idea that trade costs might rise  
disproportionately quickly at short distances and less quickly at long distances (see Hillberry and  Hummels, 2008). 
I rerun the CES-based gravity equations (18) and (19) that correspond to the first columns  in Tables 2 and 3, respectively, using the two alternative trade cost functions (22) and (23) 
instead of (13). Naturally, the change in the trade cost function affects the magnitudes of the  distance coefficients. But for both trade cost functions it is still the case that the distance  
coefficients tend to decline in absolute value across import shares.27 This  finding is consistent  
with the predictions of the translog gravity model and provides further evidence against the  
notion that trade cost elasticities are equal across impor t shares. 
I also rerun the translog gravity equations (17) and (20) that correspond to column 3 of  
Table 1 and col umn s 1  and 2  of Table 4a using the trade cost functions ( 22 ) and ( 23 ). A lthough  the magnitudes of the distance coefficients shift in response  to the alternative trade cost  
functions , the coefficient patterns  across import share intervals  are  qualitatively the same as in  
the previous translog gravity regressions. 
28 
Overall, I therefore conclude that the results  
                                                  
27 
In the regression corresponding to the first column of Table 2, the distance coefficients are -0.0819 for trade cost  function (22) and -8.8513 for trade cost function (23). In the regression corresponding to the first column of Table 3,  the distance coefficients for h=1,…,5 are -0.0892, -0.0917, -0.0893, -0.0802 and -0.0772 for trade cost function (22)  and -12.7899, -10.9773, -10.3685, -9.0189 and -6.7481 for trade cost function (23). The R-squareds are in the same  range as in Tables 2 and 3. 
28 
In the regression corresponding to column 3 of Table 1, the distance coefficients are  -0.0016 for trade cost  
function (22) and  -0.1876 for trade cost function (23). In the regression corresp onding to column 1 of Table 4a, the  
distance coefficients for  h=1,…,5 are -0.0029, -0.0033, -0.0033, -0.0036 and -0.0040 for trade cost function (22). As  in column 2 of Table 4a, the last three distance coefficients no longer increase monotonically in sizeif adjacency is  included as a regressor, in which case the distance coefficients become -0.0022, -0.0024, -0.0026, -0.0026 and            -0.0026. For trade cost function (23), the distance coefficients corresponding to column 1 of Table 4a are -0.3313,       
22 

========23========

presented in Tables 1-4 are robust to the alternative trade cost functions adopted in equations  (22) and (23). 
4.  Conclusion 
Leading trade models from the current literature imply a gravity equation that is  characterized by a constant elasticity of trade flows with respect to trade costs. This common  feature across models is related to the widespread use of CES demand systems. This paper  adopts an alternative demand system – translog preferences – and derives the corresponding  gravity equation. Due to more flexible substitution patterns across goods, translog gravity breaks the constant trade cost elasticity that is the hallmark of traditional gravity equations. Instead, the  elasticity becomes endogenous and depends on the intensity of trade flows between two  countries. 
In particular, all else being equal, the less two countries trade with each other and the  smaller their bilateral import shares, the more sensitive they are to trade costs. I test the translog  gravity specification and find evidence that strongly supports this prediction. That is, trade cost  elasticities are heterogeneous across import shares, and the traditional specification with a constant trade cost elasticity can be clearly rejected. 
The empirical results presented in this paper are based on aggregate trade flows. A  natural extension would be an application to more disaggregated data. In that regard, I have  obtained some preliminary results based on import shares between OECD countries at the level  of 3-digit industries. When I allow gravity distance coefficients for individual industries to vary  across import shares in CES-based gravity equations, their absolute values are characterized by  the same declining pattern as in Table 3 for industries as diverse as food products, plastic products and electric machinery. This additional evidence suggests that varying trade cost  elasticities are a distinguishing feature of international trade data also at the industry level.  Exploring industry-level data in more detail along those lines remains as an important topic for  future research. 
                                                                                                                                                                -0.3781, -0.3761, -0.3852 and -0.3730; and corresponding to column 2 of Table 4a they are -0.2543, -0.2839,              -0.3094, -0.2998 and -0.2434. The R-squareds are similar to those in Tables 1 and 4a. 
23 

========24========

References 
Anderson, J., van Wincoop, E., 2003. Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle.  
American Economic Review 93, pp. 170-192. 
Anderson, J., van Wincoop, E., 2004. Trade Costs. Journal of Economic Literature 42, pp. 691- 
751. 
Badinger, H., 2007. Has the EU’s Single Market Programme Fostered Competition? Testing for  
a Decrease in Mark-up Ratios in EU Industries. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and  
Statistics 69, pp. 497-519. 
Behrens, K., Mion, G., Murata, Y., Südekum, J., 2009. Trade, Wages and Productivity. Centre  
for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper #7369. 
Bergin, P., Feenstra, R., 2000. Staggered Price Setting, Translog Preferences, and Endogenous  
Persistence. Journal of Monetary Economics 45, pp. 657-680. 
Bergin, P., Feenstra, R., 2009. Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Competition between  
Floaters and Fixers. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 41S, pp. 35-70. 
Bergstrand, J., 1985. The Gravity Equation in International Trade: Some Microeconomic  
Foundations and Empirical Evidence. Review of Economics and Statistics 67, pp. 474- 
481. 
Bergstrand, J., 1989. The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition, and the  
Factor-Proportions Theory in International Trade. Review of Economics and Statistics 71,  
pp. 143-153. 
Chaney, T., 2008. Distorted Gravity: The Intensive and Extensive Margins of International  
Trade. American Economic Review 98, pp. 1707-1721. 
Chen, N., Imbs, J., Scott, A., 2009. The Dynamics of Trade and Competition. Journal of  
International Economics 77, pp. 50-62. 
Christensen, L., Jorgenson, D., Lau, L., 1971. Conjugate Duality and the Transcendental  
Logarithmic Function. Econometrica 39, pp. 255-256. 
Christensen, L., Jorgenson, D., Lau, L., 1975. Transcendental Logarithmic Utility Functions.  
American Economic Review 65, pp. 367-383. 
Deardorff, A., 1998. Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical  
World? In: Jeffrey A. Frankel (Ed.), The Regionalization of the World Economy.  
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Deaton, A., Muellbauer, J., 1980. An Almost Ideal Demand System. American Economic Review 
70, pp. 312-326. 
Diewert, W.E., 1976. Exact and Superlative Index Numbers. Journal of Econometrics 4, pp. 115- 
145. 
Disdier, A., Head, K., 2008. The Puzzling Persistence of the Distance Effect on Bilateral Trade.  
Review of Economics and Statistics 90, pp. 37-48. 
Eaton, J., Kortum, S., 2002. Technology, Geography and Trade. Econometrica 70, pp. 1741- 
1779. 
Evenett, S., Keller, W., 2002. On Theories Explaining the Success of the Gravity Equation.  
Journal of Political Economy 110, pp. 281-316. 
Feenstra, R., 1994. New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices.  
American Economic Review 84, pp. 157-177. 
Feenstra, R., 2003. A Homothetic Utility Function for Monopolistic Competition Models,  
without Constant Price Elasticity. Economics Letters 78, pp. 79-86. 
24 

========25========

Feenstra, R., Kee, H.L., 2008. Export Variety and Country Productivity: Estimating the  
Monopolistic Competition Model with Endogenous Productivity. Journal of  
International Economics 74, pp. 500-518. 
Feenstra, R., Markusen, J., Rose, A., 2001. Using the Gravity Equation to Differentiate Among  
Alternative Theories of Trade. Canadian Journal of Economics 34, pp. 430-447. Feenstra, R., Weinstein, D., 2010. Globalization, Markups, and the U.S. Price Level. National  
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #15749. 
Gohin, A., Féménia, F., 2009. Estimating Price Elasticities of Food Trade Functions. How  
Relevant is the CES-Based Gravity Approach? Journal of Agricultural Economics 60, pp.  
253-272. 
Helpman, E., Melitz, M., Rubinstein, Y., 2008. Estimating Trade Flows: Trading Partners and  
Trading Volumes. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123, pp. 441-487. 
Hillberry, R., Hummels, D., 2008. Trade Responses to Geographic Frictions: A Decomposition  
Using Micro-Data. European Economic Review 52, pp. 527-550. 
Hummels, D., Klenow, P., 2005. The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports. American  
Economic Review 95, pp. 704-723. 
Kehoe, T., Ruhl, K., 2009. How Important is the New Goods Margin in International Trade?  
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Research Department, Staff Report 324. Komorovska, J., Kuiper, M., van Tongeren, F., 2007. Sharing Gravity: Gravity Estimates of  
Trade Shares in Agri-Food. Working Paper, OECD. 
Lo, L., 1990. A Translog Approach to Consumer Spatial Behavior. Journal of Regional Science 
30, pp. 393-413. 
Markusen, J., 1986. Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach. American  
Economic Review 76, pp. 1002-1011. 
Melitz, M., Ottaviano, G., 2008. Market Size, Trade, and Productivity. Review of Economic  
Studies 75, pp. 295-316. 
Volpe Martincus, C., Estevadeordal, A., 2009. Trade Policy and Specialization in Developing  
Countries. Review of World Economics 145, pp. 251-275. 
25 

========26========

Technical Appendix 
This appendix outlines the derivation of the translog gravity equation (7). Substituting the expenditures shares implied by (4) into the market-clearing condition (6) yields 
      
J J J NNNii 
y x y s y pi ij j mj j m km kj   ln( ) . 
j j m N j m N k       1 1 1 1 1 1ii11 
Use pkj=tkjpk and define world income as  yyW  
 
J 
j  1 
j 
to obtain 
y y t y p   i j m km kj km k       ln( ) ln( ) ,W 
     
J N NNNii 
j m N k m N k      1 1 1 1 1ii11    
which can be rearranged as 
NNiiN J N 
               
ptyykm k m km ksln( ) ln( ) ,isWW 
m N k s m N k      ii111 1 1 1 1yy    
where the first summation index on the right-hand side is changed from jto s. 
Then substitute the last equation back into the import share (5): 
xij 
NNiiN J N 
       y y y           ln( ) ln( )yyism km kj m km ksttWW 
j m N k s m N k      ii111 1 1 1 1    
yyJ N NN 
i 
  yy    
is 
WW 
 
km kj km ksln( ) ln( )tt 
s m N k k    1 1 1 1i1 
 
J Ni 
 
yyis 
 
N 
y y t 
WW km 
ln 
 t 
m N k 
kj 
. 
s11i1 
 
1 ks 
Use (3) to arrive at 
x t tij kj mjyyJNis 
Ni 
    
y y y N t N t   WW  ln 1 ln 
   N 
 
j ks mss m N k k m1 1 1,i      1 
    
     y y N t t      
yyJNN 
i 
is 
 
WW 
ln ln .ttkj mj 
s m N k   1 1 1i1 
    
ks ms 
To ease notationdefine the geometric mean of trade costsin country j as 
N 
1/N Ttj kj  
 
k1 
so that 
x T tJNij j mjyy 
i 
  y y y T t       
is 
WW 
 
ln ln . 
j s mss m N  11 i1 
    
26 

========27========

Recall that tmj=tij if m ϵ [Ni-1+1,Ni] so that the previous equation can be rewritten as 
x T tij j ijyyis 
J 
  y y y T t 
WWni 
      j s iss1 
ln ln 
    
J 
   y y t 
i s is 
    
 
y y TWW  n t n T ni ij i j iln ln ln , 
 
s 1  s 
where n N Ni i i 
1 
denotes the number of goods of country  i. Note that ln( )Tj can be rewritten  as a weighted average of trade costs over the trading partners of country j: 
NJ 
ln( ) ln( ) ln( ).T t t1 NN 
nsj kj sj 
ks11 
27 

========28========

Table 1: Translog gravity 
Dependent variable 
xij/yj (1) 
ni ln(distij) 
ni ln(Tdistj ) 
-0.0296*** (0.0041) 0.0207*** (0.0049) 
ni adjij 
ni Tadjj 
ln(distij) 
adjij 
R-squared Observations 
0.52 749 
Multiple goods per country 
xij/yj (2) 
(xij/yj)/ni 
(3) 
(xij/yj)/ni 
(4) 
-0.0190*** (0.0029) 0.0105*** (0.0034) 0.0510*** (0.0117) -0.0471** (0.0192) 
-0.0250*** (0.0033) 
-0.0159*** (0.0021) 0.0450*** (0.0090) 
0.59 749 
0.50 749 
0.57 749 
One good per country (ni=1) 
xij/yj xij/yj 
(5) (6) 
-0.0149*** (0.0022) 
-0.0094*** (0.0016) 0.0273*** (0.0053) 
0.50 749 
0.56 749 
Notes: Data for the year 2000. Robust standard errors clustered around country pairs (378 clusters) reported in  parentheses, OLS estimation. Columns 1 and2: exporter fixed effects not reported. Columns 3-6: exporter and  importer fixed effects not reported. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level. 
28 

========29========

Table 2: Constant elasticity gravity 
Dependent variable 
ln(xij/yj) (1) 
ln(xij/yj) (2) 
ln((xij/yj)/ni) 
(3) 
ln((xij/yj)/ni) 
(4) 
ln(distij) 
-1.2390*** (0.0625) 
-1.1697*** (0.0713) 0.3440** (0.1720) 
-1.2390*** (0.0625) 
adjij 
-1.1697*** (0.0713) 0.3440** (0.1720) 
R-squared 0.89 0.89 0.85 0.85 Observations 749 749 749 749 Notes: Data for the year 2000. Robust standard errors clustered around country pairs (378 clusters)  reported in parentheses, OLS estimation. The coefficients in columns 1 and 2 are the same as in  columns 3 and 4. Exporter and importer fixed effects not reported. ** significant at 5% level. ***  significant at 1% level. 
29 

========30========

Table 3: Testing constant elasticity gravity against translog gravity (Hypothesis A) 
Dependent variable 
ln(xij/yj) (1) 
ln(distij), h=1 
ln(distij), h=2 
ln(distij), h=3 
ln(distij), h=4 
ln(distij), h=5 
-1.4960*** (0.1377) -1.4636*** (0.1223) -1.3668*** (0.1092) -1.2235*** (0.1024) -1.0790*** (0.1000) 
adjij, h=2 
adjij, h=3 
adjij, h=4 
adjij, h=5 
R-squared Observations 
0.90 749 
Intervals based on (xij/yj)/ni ln(xij/yj) ln((xij/yj)/ni) 
(2) (3) 
ln((xij/yj)/ni) 
-1.4490*** (0.1313) -1.3405*** (0.1117) -1.2502*** (0.1043) -1.0662*** (0.0968) -0.8297*** (0.1045) 1.9499*** (0.2279) 2.3218*** (0.2150) 0.7333*** (0.2345) 0.6221*** (0.1500) 
-1.4960*** (0.1377) -1.4636*** (0.1223) -1.3668*** (0.1092) -1.2235*** (0.1024) -1.0790*** (0.1000) 
-1.4490*** 
-1.3405*** 
-1.2502*** 
-1.0662*** 
-0.8297*** 
1.9499*** 
2.3218*** 
0.7333*** 
0.6221*** 
0.90 749 
0.86 749 
(4) 
Intervals based on (xij/yj) ln(xij/yj) ln(xij/yj) 
(5) (6) 
(0.1313) 
(0.1117) 
(0.1043) 
(0.0968) 
(0.1045) 
-1.6523*** (0.1080) -1.3936*** (0.1180) -1.3369*** (0.1123) -1.3311*** (0.0947) -1.0662*** (0.0910) 
(0.2279) 
(0.2150) 
(0.2345) 
(0.1500) 
-1.5970*** (0.1044) -1.3190*** (0.1140) -1.2131*** (0.1017) -1.1551*** (0.0946) -0.8251*** (0.0972) 1.1283* (0.6657) 1.6318*** (0.5925) 0.5197*** (0.1910) 0.6359*** (0.1556) 
0.87 749 
0.89 749 
0.90 749 
Notes: Data for the year 2000. The index h denotes intervals in orde r of ascending predicted import shares. The intervals  in columns 1-4 are based on predicted import shares divided by n 
i. The intervals in columns 5 and 6 are based on  predicted import shares only. The adjij regressor for interval h=1 drops out since no adj acent country pair falls into this  interval. Robust standard errors clustered around country pairs (378 clusters) reported in parentheses, OLS estimation.  Exporter and importer fixed effects and interval fixed effects not reported. The coefficients in colu mns 1 and 2 are the  same as in columns 3 and 4. * significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level. 
30 

========31========

Table 4a: Testing translog gravity against constant  elasticity gravity (Hypothesis B) 
Intervals based on (xij/yj)/ni 
Dependent variable 
(xij/yj)/ni 
(1) 
(xij/yj)/ni 
(2) 
ln(distij), h=1 
ln(distij), h=2 
ln(distij), h=3 
ln(distij), h=4 
ln(distij), h=5 
-0.0449*** (0.0068) -0.0518*** (0.0077) -0.0516*** (0.0078) -0.0543*** (0.0079) -0.0567*** (0.0084) 
adjij, h=5 
-0.0347*** (0.0039) -0.0383*** (0.0042) -0.0412*** (0.0046) -0.0411*** (0.0045) -0.0380*** (0.0057) 0.0608*** (0.0103) 
R-squared 0.64 0.71 Observations 749 749 Notes: Data for the year 2000. The index h denotes intervals in  order of ascending predicted import shares. The intervals are  based on predicted import shares divided by n 
i. The adjij regressors for intervals h=1-4 drop out in column 2 since no  adjacent country pair falls into these intervals. Robust  standard errors clustered around country pairs (378 clusters)  reported in parentheses, OLS estimation. Exporter and  importer fixed effects and interval fixed effects not reported.  *** significant at 1% level. 
31 

========32========

Table 4b: Testing translog gravity against constant elasticity gravity (Hypothesis B) 
Intervals based on (xij/yj)/ni 
Dependent variable 
xij/yj (1) 
ni ln(distij), h=1 
ni ln(distij), h=2 
ni ln(distij), h=3 
ni ln(distij), h=4 
ni ln(distij), h=5 
ni ln(Tdistj ), h=1 
ni ln(Tdistj ), h=2 
ni ln(Tdistj ), h=3 
ni ln(Tdistj ), h=4 
ni ln(Tdistj ), h=5 
-0.0535*** (0.0090) -0.0446*** (0.0081) -0.0507*** (0.0085) -0.0585*** (0.0095) -0.0627*** (0.0087) 0.0430*** (0.0076) 0.0300*** (0.0067) 0.0343*** (0.0072) 0.0391*** (0.0085) 0.0417*** (0.0084) 
ni adjij, h=5 
ni Tadjj , h=5 
R-squared Observations 
0.64 749 
xij/yj (2) 
Intervals based on (xij/yj) xij/yj xij/yj 
(3) (4) 
-0.0406*** (0.0064) -0.0351*** (0.0052) -0.0376*** (0.0054) -0.0406*** (0.0062) -0.0476*** (0.0077) 0.0286*** (0.0049) 0.0189*** (0.0037) 0.0199*** (0.0043) 0.0207*** (0.0055) 0.0256*** (0.0067) 0.0536*** (0.0161) -0.1309** (0.0647) 
-0.0403*** (0.0085) -0.0338*** (0.0075) -0.0334*** (0.0069) -0.0332*** (0.0061) -0.0601*** (0.0079) 0.0291*** (0.0065) 0.0201*** (0.0057) 0.0195*** (0.0058) 0.0184*** (0.0055) 0.0413*** (0.0083) 
-0.0369*** (0.0061) -0.0327*** (0.0054) -0.0337*** (0.0053) -0.0343*** (0.0055) -0.0439*** (0.0084) 0.0258*** (0.0047) 0.0183*** (0.0039) 0.0189*** (0.0040) 0.0163*** (0.0044) 0.0242*** (0.0079) 0.0529*** (0.0161) -0.0933* (0.0501) 
0.69 749 
0.64 749 
0.68 749 
Notes: Data for the year 2000. The index h denotes intervals in order of ascending predicted import  shares. The intervals in columns 1 and 2 are based on predicted import shares divided by  ni. The  intervals in columns 3 and 4 are based on predicted import shares only.  The ni adjij regressors for  intervals h=1-4 drop out in column 2 since no adjacent country pairs fall into these intervals (intervals  h=1, 2 and 4 in column 4). The ni Tadjj regressors for intervals h=1-4 in columns 2 and 4 are included but  not reported here. Robust standard errors clustered around country pairs (378 clusters) reported in  parentheses, OLS estimation. Exporter fixed effects and interval fixed effects not reported. * significant  at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level. *** significant at 1% level. 
32 

========33========

Table 5: General equilibrium effects in response to a counterfactual decline in trade costs 
Import share interval 
Total effect Δ ln(xij/yj) 
(1) 
= 
Direct effect (1-σ) Δ ln(tij) 
h=1 h=2 h=3 h=4 h=5 
0.0702 0.0699 0.0696 0.0690 0.0637 
= = = = = 
+ 
(2) 
Indirect GE effect Δ ln(yi/yW) + (σ-1) Δ ln(PiPj) 
(3) (4) 
0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 0.07 
+ + + + + 
-0.0007 -0.0007 -0.0008 -0.0006 -0.0007 
+ + + + + 
0.0009 0.0007 0.0003 -0.0003 -0.0056 
Trade cost elasticity Total Direct (5a) (5b) 
Distance elasticity Total Direct (6a) (6b) 
-7.02 -6.99 -6.96 -6.90 -6.37 
-7 -7 -7 -7 -7 
-1.00 -1.00 -0.99 -0.99 -0.91 
-1 -1 -1 -1 -1 
um is based  
Notes: This table reports l ogarithmic differences of variables between the initial equilibrium and the counterfactual equilibrium. The initial equilibri 
on country income shares y 
W 
i/y 
for the year 2000 and bilateral distance data for the 28 countries in the sample (28*27=756 bilateral observations). For each  bilateral observation a counterfactual equilibrium is computed under the assumption that bilateral trade costs tij for this observation have decreased by one  percent all else being equal, yielding 756 counterfactual scenarios. The table reports the logarithmic differences between the initial and the counterfactual  equilibria averaged across five import share intervals denoted by h. Import share intervals are in ascending order and based on the initial equilibrium. Assumed  parameter values: σ=8 and ρ=1/7. Column 1: change in the import share; column 2: change in bilateral trade costs scaled by the substitution elasticity; column 3: change in the exporting country's income share; column 4: change in multilateral resistance scaled by the substitution elasticity; columns 5a and 5b: implied  trade cost elasticities based on total effect and direct effect (=1-σ); columns 6a and 6b: implied distance elasticities based on total effect and direct effect (=(1- 
σ)*ρ). 
33 

========34========

34 

========35========

