November 2011 
No. 61 
The Golden Age and the Second Globalization of Italy 
Nicholas Crafts (University of Warwick) and  
Marco Magnani (Banca d‟Italia) 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

The Golden Age and the Second Globalization in Italy 
Nicholas Crafts 
(CAGE, University of Warwick) 
and 
Marco Magnani 
(Banca d‟Italia) 
Abstract 
After the Golden Age, Italy experienced increasing difficulties in adjusting its economy to  the changing external context and to the requirements for sustaining  catch-up  growth at  a  higher  level  of  economic  development.  The  adjustment issue  is  common  to  advanced  countries  but  the  difficulties  experienced  in  Italy  look  particularly  severe.  Cushioned  by  inflation and devaluation, growth remained relatively high in the 1970s. In the subsequent  decade,  in  spite  of  improved  conditions  for  addressing  macroeconomic  disequilibria structural  adjustments were  neglected.  Major  supply  side  reforms  were  eventually  implemented  in  the  aftermath  of  the  1992  crisis.  Nevertheless,  in  the  second  half  of  the  decade  growth  fell  below  the  EU  average.  These  necessary  reforms  fell  however  short  of  what was required. Participation in EMU did not help as far as the improvement of growth  prospects  was  concerned.  In  the  last  section  some  of  the  economic  and  meta-economic  factors explaining the ineffectiveness of the reform process are briefly explored. 
Keywords: catching-up; economic growth; economic reform; productivity performance 
JEL classifications:  N14, O52. 
Paper prepared for the conference “Italy and the World Economy, 1861-2011” held at the  Banca d‟Italia, Rome, October 2011. 
2 

========2========

1. Introduction 
This  paper  seeks  to  describe  and  explain  Italy‟s  growth  performance  in  the  period  since  World  War  II.  We  develop  an  interpretation  of  catch-up  growth  from  an  initial  position  where the level of per capita income was well below that of the leading economies and then  explore  the  experience  of  recent  decades  where  the  issue  becomes  one  of  further  modernization to maintain a strong position among the elite. Economic policy decisions, in  particular  those  made  in  response  to challenges  emerging  from  the  external  economic  environment,  have  played  a  major  role  in  determining  productivity  performance  through  their impact on the quantity and quality of investment and innovation, and an evaluation of  their part in growth outcomes is our central concern. 
An important starting point for our analysis is the proposition that the process of catch-up  growth typically entails a series of ongoing reforms with the danger that at some point the  political  economy  of  the  next  step  in  modernization  becomes  too  difficult.  As  modern  growth  economics  stresses  (Aghion  and  Howitt  2006),  the  institutions  and  policy  choices  that can galvanize a far-from-frontier economy differ in many ways from what is appropriate  for  a  close-to-frontier  economy.  In  particular,  in  the  latter  case  stronger  competition  in  product  markets  and  high-quality  education  become  more  important.  Similarly,  as  new  technologies come along, institutions and policies may need to be reformed. Yet, making the  requisite adjustments may be problematic and achieved only slowly and incompletely such  that  catch-up  growth  falters.  The  constraints  of  the  historical  legacy  are  important  in  this  context. 
The  international  economic  environment  affects  growth  performance  in  several  important  ways although its impact will depend upon the details of the domestic policy response and  interactions with domestic institutions. It follows that each country‟s performance will have  a common component based on external circumstances and an individual component based  on its own distinctive behaviour shaped by history and politics, even though ideas as to what  is „best-practice‟ policy are strongly correlated across the OECD countries. 
Key  aspects  of  developments  in  the  world  economy  most  obviously  include  high-profile  shocks to aggregate supply (such as oil-price rises) and to aggregate demand (for example,  financial crises). Dealing with these macroeconomic disturbances can entail policy choices  with long-term supply-side consequences. In turn, the extent of policy discretion depends on  the  international  economic  architecture  of  monetary  arrangements,  treaty  obligations  etc.  which  influence  the  prospects  for  export-led  growth  and  the  extent  of  globalization.  As  globalization  proceeds,  changes  in  the  international division  of  labour  imply  the  need  for  structural  change  and  this  places  a  premium  on  flexibility  in  domestic  markets.  Finally,  technological change, which overwhelmingly comes from other countries‟ R & D, provides  opportunities  for  faster  growth  but  exploiting  them  well  may  depend  on  policy  reform.  Across the world, the diffusion of, and convergence in, the use of technology has speeded up  and has been about three times as rapid post-1950 compared with pre-1925 (Comin et al. 2006). 
3 

========3========

The international economic environment with which the Italian economy interacts has been  transformed in the last sixty  years.  The  general trajectory  has been towards globalization,  i.e., the greater economic integration of capital and product markets especially within Europe  but also across the world as a whole, starting from a position of very low capital mobility  and trade protectionism following the disruptions of the Great Depression and World War II.  Tables 1 and 2 reflect these trends. 
Table  1  shows  a  big  decline  in  trade  costs  during  the  postwar  period;  these  trends  are  dominated by reductions in protectionist barriers rather than declines in transport costs. This  is  apparent  from  the  variations  for  Italian  trade  with  different  partners  which  reveal  that  European  integration has  been  the  most  powerful  influence  on  trade  costs.  The  EEC  stimulated  both  „juggernaut‟  and  „domino‟  effects  which  consolidated  the  original  trade  agreement  through  increasing  the  weight  of  business  favouring  further  liberalization  and  encouraging both enlargement and multilateral tariff reductions (Baldwin 2006). 
Table  2  reflects  the  very  low  level  of  international  capital  mobility  in  the  early  postwar  period when OECD countries, including Italy, generally controlled capital movements very  tightly  while making  their  macroeconomic  trilemma  choice  for  a  combination  of  independent monetary policy  and  a fixed  exchange rate under the auspices of the Bretton  Woods  international  monetary  system  (Obstfeld  and  Taylor 2004).  From  the  1980s,  the  globalization of capital markets accelerated sharply and Italy moved to full capital-account  liberalization by the 1990s, a very different policy stance compared with the early 1950s. 
After World War II, growth of world trade by volume was very strong; it outstripped world  GDP  growth  and  averaged  7.9  per  cent  during  1950-1973  (WTO  2008)  even  though  the  world average decline in trade costs was only about 2 per cent prior to 1970 in a period when  trade  liberalization  mainly  concerned  OECD  manufacturing.  From  1973  to  the  eve  of the  current crisis, world trade growth slowed to 4.8 per cent per year but was still much faster  than GDP growth. A striking feature of these years was the emergence of a new international  division of labour in which Asian countries became much more important as exporters of  manufactures while the shares of Europe and North America contracted sharply (Table 3).  This reflected Asian success in putting in place policies and institutions that promoted rapid  catch-up growth, first in Japan, then in the Asian Tigers followed by China and India (Table  4). Adjustments to this new exporting prowess were required, especially of those countries  like  Italy  where  revealed  comparative  advantage  was  positively  correlated  with  that  of  dynamic Asia (Rae and Sollie 2007). 
Table 4 reports that the period from the early 1950s to the first OPEC oil shock, the so-called  Golden Age of European growth, was one where the world economy as a whole grew fast.  These  were  the  years  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  pegged  exchange  rates  and,  quite  unlike  the  interwar  period,  an  era  when  OECD  countries  were  largely  free  from  financial  crises and macroeconomic turbulence (Bordo 1993). It was an ideal opportunity for countries  with  undervalued  exchange  rates,  faced  with  buoyant  export  demand,  to  industrialize  and  catch  up  (Boltho  1996).  Conversely,  the  stagflation  of  the  1970s,  driven  by  adverse  aggregate  supply  shocks,  was  an  environment  that  posed  great  challenges  for  macroeconomic policymakers who faced difficult trade-offs between objectives. For many  European  countries,  including  Italy,  the  policy  framework  that  eventually  emerged  was  a  trajectory towards a single currency  via the European Monetary System of the 1980s  and  
4 

========4========

1990s. This was an era of slower macroeconomic growth but, after the 1980s, a combination  of  good  luck  in  terms  of  the  absence  of  adverse  shocks  and  the  adoption  of  inflation- targeting policies produced macroeconomic stability, the so-called Great Moderation (Stock  and Watson 2005). 
Fast European growth in the 1950s and 1960s was based on policies and institutions which  facilitated high rates of investment and the diffusion of American technology in the era of  Fordist manufacturing. Broadly speaking, this was a period where, to use the terminology of  Hall and Soskice (2001), „co-ordinated market economies‟ prospered. This was generally a  period  of  greater  government  intervention  in  terms  of  regulation,  state  ownership  and  industrial policy. In later decades, growth opportunities centred more on the services sector  and  the  diffusion  of  information  and  communications  technologies  (ICT).  This  seems  to  have  been  an  era  which  placed  a  greater  premium  on  flexible  adjustment  in  labour  and  product markets and on intangible capital accumulation rather than on massive investment in  physical capital (Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2005; Timmer et al. 2010). In this era, the „liberal  market  economies‟  were  better  placed.  However,  as  ideas  of  „best  practice‟  in  microeconomic  policy  changed,  there  was  a  general  change  of  emphasis  among  OECD  countries towards competition and privatization policies.  
To  a  considerable  extent,  Italy  has  shared  in  these  general  European  trends.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  in  some  respects  the  Italian  experience  differs.  With  regard  to  institutions,  as  Hall  and  Soskice  (2001)  note,  Italy  has  represented  an  „ambiguous  case‟,  neither CME (German-style) bank-based nor an LME (American-style). Concerning policy  responses, the Italian approach to coping with the stagflationary shocks of the 1970s resulted  in a relatively high inflation economy and led to the build-up of a high ratio of public debt to  GDP in the 1980s. (Fig.1) Obviously, the question of economic performance in the South  marks out Italy as a special case. In terms of growth outcomes, the key feature is that, as a  far-from-frontier  economy  in  the  age  of  Fordist  manufacturing,  Italy  outperformed  during  the Golden Age but, as a close-to-frontier economy in the ICT era, Italy has disappointed  over the last twenty years. 
This highlights the general question of whether Italy was more in need of policy reform than  its European peer group after the Golden Age or whether policy reforms were implemented  more slowly or less successfully. And, in turn, this raises a number of other issues which are  explored in what follows. These include evaluating the pluses and minuses of the „postwar  settlement‟ both in the short and the long run, reviewing supply-side policies relevant to the  considering  the  implications  of  the  decisions  that  Italy  made  with  regard  to  the  European  integration agenda, and the possible reasons for the difficulties of implementing structural  reforms, in particular after the Golden Age. 
We end our analysis in 2007 on the eve of the crisis which we do not explicitly consider. In  so far as Italy‟s difficulties during the present travails of the Eurozone have been exacerbated  by  inadequate  public-finance  and  supply-side  reforms  our  discussion  of  Italy‟s  economic  history provides some context for, although not an analysis of, these problems.  
5 

========5========

2. Italy in the Golden Age 
It has become conventional in comparative studies of European economic growth to consider  the  period  1950-73  as  the  „Golden  Age‟.  This  was  a  period  of  β-convergence  in  which  European  countries  generally  experienced  rapid  catch-up  growth  based  on  technology  transfer and structural change and growth rates were inversely correlated with initial income  levels. The basis of catch-up varied over time; initially, postwar reconstruction and reduction  in  the  size  of  agriculture  the  agricultural  sector  played  a  part  but,  in  general,  by  the  later  1960s reductions in technology gaps were the main source (Temin 2002).  
During the Golden Age, Italy enjoyed growth of real GDP per person at almost 5 per cent per  year,  as  Table  5  reports.  This  largely  reflects  the  relatively  large  scope  for  catch-up  reflected in the low initial income level in 1950. However, normalizing for initial income,  Italy outperformed its European peer group and growth was about 0.65 percentage points per  year faster than might have been expected (Crafts and Toniolo 2008). Labour productivity  growth averaged 6.8 per cent per  year in industry and 5.7 per cent per  year in agriculture  during these years (Broadberry et al. 2010). The weight of agriculture in the economy fell  rapidly; the sector accounted for 44 per cent of employment in 1951 but only 18 per cent in  1973. 
Italy enjoyed a remarkably rapid rate of total factor productivity (TFP) growth at this time;  from 1945 to 1973 the average was 5.8 per cent per year (Broadberry et al. 2010). As catch- up  proceeded  from  a  starting  point  of  „backwardness‟,  in  part,  TFP  growth  came  from  reductions  in  inefficiency,  especially  resulting  from  the  movement  of  labour  out  of  agriculture,  as  Table  6  reports,  and  from  the  realization  of  substantial  economies  of  scale  (Rossi  and  Toniolo  1996).  In  part,  TFP  growth  reflected  successful  technology  transfer  together with creative adaptation and localized learning at which  Italy  excelled (Antonelli  and Barbiellini-Amidei  2009) even though the country  did not have a national innovation  system that exhibited high levels of R & D or rates of patenting. In the 1960s, Italy spent  only about 0.6 per cent GDP on R & D (about  1/3 the West German level), and in 1973  obtained only 3.4 per cent of the foreign patents in the United States compared with a West  German share of 24.2 per cent (Verspagen 1996; Pavitt and Soete 1982). 
Human capital was on the whole favourable. While average years of schooling were low, 4.8  years  in  1950  rising  to  6.8  in  1970  (Morrisson  and  Murtin  2009),  human  capital  was,  however, suited to incrementally adapt the imported technologies which constituted the main  channel of innovation. In comparative terms, Italy benefited from the high number of good  engineers,  who  played  an  essential  role  in  designing  the  organization  of  the  productive  processes in large firms. This expertise was inherited and further developed largely by public  firms which were the main promoters of the convergence of the Italian industrial structure  towards that prevailing in Europe (De Nardis and Traù 2005; Barca and Trento 1997). This  evolution  paralleled  and  complemented  the  earliest  stages  of  the  process  driven  by  small‐medium  firms,  often  forming  industrial  districts  specialized  in  traditional  products,  which  accelerated  dramatically  later  in  the  Seventies.  The  convergence  process  of  the  Golden  Age  was,  however,  incomplete:  high‐technology  sectors  were  less  well  developed  
6 

========6========

than in the other major European economies, as is reflected in the trade performance data  reported in Federico and Wolf (2010). 
Clearly, moving to a trajectory of rapid catch-up growth was not automatic but required an  appropriate  institutional  and  policy  framework,  „social  capability‟  in  the  well-known  terminology of Abramovitz (1986). In this regard, a key ingredient in Western Europe was  the „postwar settlement‟ which for most countries was reached in the context of the Marshall  Plan.  
It is not entirely clear how much difference the Marshall Plan made to early postwar Italy. It  is unlikely that growth was much affected by the direct economic effects of the $1.5 billion  which Italy received from the United States in the years 1948 to 1951, amounting to 2per  cent of GDP compared with an average of 2.5 per cent for all countries (Eichengreen and  Uzan 1992), but it may have been an important factor in deciding the distribution of the costs  of  stabilization,  in  supporting  the  modernization  of  industrial  plants,  especially  in  the  electrical,  steel  and  metals  sectors  (Fauri  2010),  and  in  heading  off  a  possible  „war  of  attrition‟ (Casella and Eichengreen 1994). It also added impetus to the move towards trade  liberalization and the European Payments Union. 
The main features of the postwar settlement in Italy were an early stabilization in 1947, a  political  constitution  that  embodied  checks  and  balances,  the  isolation  of  a  strong  Communist Party, the progressive opening to international competition, and participation in  the Bretton Woods system.  Italy was at the forefront of the European integration process,  moved  relatively  quickly  to  reduce  barriers  to  international  trade  and  joined  the  Bretton- Woods  system  at  an  undervalued  parity.1 These  decisions  were,  of  cour se,  strongly  influenced by the positioning of Italy in the Western bloc led by the US. At the same time,  
they were seen by the leading economic authorities (notably by Luigi Einaudi, the Governor  
of the Bank of Italy and, in 1947, Minister of the Budget) a s useful steps in order to foster  competition and to weaken the industrial oligopolistic groups.  
However, unlike what happened in the United Kingdom in 1948 and later in Germany where   competition authorities were created,  on the domestic front this aim  
by  corresponding  attempts  to  implement  competition  policies;  corporate  governance  structures  remained  closed,  sectors  sheltered  from  international  competition  (retail,  professional orders, public utilities)  highly regulated.  
was not accompanied  
The domes tic policy stance reflected the heterogeneous nature of the main political forces  
and interest groups. “Free market” supporters were in a minority – because of the prevailing  ideological climate in Europe after the war and because of the Italian historical legacy – and  had to face not only the isolated but socially influential communist and socialist opposition  but also the hostility of an important component of the ruling party (the catholic Democrazia  cristiana) which favoured an active role for the State in the economy. A similar confidence in  the necessity of public  intervention in promoting accumulation and a corresponding mistrust  in the capacity of private groups of accomplishing this task shaped the ideas of the leading  managers  of  the  State-owned  enterprises  (IRI),  among  them  Donato  Menichella,  general  
                                                            
1 
The parity of the lira was set at 625 per US dollar at the end of 1949. The US proposal of a more devalued  parity was successfully resisted by the Italian government (Asso, Biagioli and Picozza 1995). 
7 

========7========

director of IRI in 1933-1944 and Governor of the Bank of Italy from 1948 to 1960. In fact, a  distinctive feature of the postwar settlement was the preservation of the unusually large role  played by firms and banks controlled by the State, but operating as private profit oriented  autonomous entities, created in 1933 following the collapse of the big private financial and  industrial groups. It was mainly the political acumen of the Prime Minister and leader of the  Democrazia Cristiana, Alcide De Gasperi, that enabled a balance to be struck between these  different forces, and between them and the interests of the private industrial firms.  
After  World  War  II,  for  the  first  time  in  Italian  history,  the  South – since  1861  the  most  prominent structural issue of the Italian economy (Iuzzolino, Pellegrini and Viesti 2011) – became the object of systematic specific policies. As a matter of fact, at the outset of the  Golden Age, the South  benefited very little from ERP funds (Fauri 2010; Del Monte and  Giannola  1978).  The  promotion  of  growth  in  the  South  was  not  a  priority  of  the  policy  agenda (Cafiero 1996). However, two factors rapidly changed this picture. First, the acute  social  tensions  in  the  huge  Southern  agricultural  sector,  largely  based  on  large  estates,  greatly  endangered  political  stability  and  therefore  the  integration  of  Italy  in  the  Western  bloc. Second, the influence and the quality of the IRI management which survived the end of  fascism was a fundamental element in promoting a specific policy aimed at the reduction of  the North-South gap. This policy, “l‟intervento straordinario”  (special development policy)  was  based  on  the  principle  of  additionality  with  respect  to  “ordinary”  policy  (i.e.,  was  targeted  specifically  at  the  backward  areas  and  was  therefore  “extra”  with  respect  to  “ordinary”  capital  expenditure),  and  was  conceived  as  a  decisive  part  of  Italian  economic  policy as a whole. It was animated by the belief that the closure of the income gap, far from  being  the  long  period  outcome  of  market  forces – as  mainstream  economist  thought  had  maintained – had to be achieved by policy means. The growth of the South and of Italy was  seen  as  one  thing:  this  was  the  central  idea  animating  the  promoters  of  the  special  development policy and later of the structural-reform policy (programmazione) during the  centre-left governments at the beginning of the 1960s (La Malfa 1962).  
The  main  instrument  of  the  special  development  policy,  the  “Cassa  del  Mezzogiorno”,  turned out to be a body independent from the Public Administration. 2 The autonomy from  ordinary Public Administration was a feature of Italian economic policy in the Golden Age,  
not just regional policy. Not by chance, the most successful period of the Cassa coincided  with this period. Between 1951 and 1973, the North-South gap in terms of GDP per head  experienced a strong reduction for the first and only time in history.  
In the Golden Age, the South had positive effects on the growth of the rest of Italy. Low- skilled  and  cheap  labour,  particularly  suitable  for  the  Fordist  mode  of  production,  poured  from  the  Southern  agricultural  sector  into  the  Northern  plants. Especially  prior  to  the  creation  of  the  European  Common  Market,  the  growing  market  in  the  South  increased  demand for Northern products. At the end of the 1950s, 70 per cent of net exports of the  Center-North were directed towards the South. The growth of the domestic market allowed  economies of scale to be realized in Northern firms (Iuzzolino, Pellegrini and Viesti 2011.)   
                                                            
2 
In  the  first  years  it  was  subject  to  the  supervision  of  the  International  Bank  for  Reconstruction  and Development which heavily financed the start - up of the “Cassa.”  
8 

========8========

Trade liberalization was an important factor in Western Europe‟s Golden Age. Between the  late 1950s and early 1970s, it raised the average growth rate by about 1 per cent per year  (Badinger 2005). Countries which were slow to liberalize such as Spain and Ireland paid a  price in terms of slower growth. In the Italian case, the move to greater openness facilitated a  process of export-led growth as Italy‟s share of world manufactured exports rose from 3.7  per  cent  in  1950  to  6.8 per  cent in  1973.  The  real  exchange  rate  was  kept  low  by  the  tendency for real wages to grow only a little faster than labour productivity in the context of  an elastic supply of labour to manufacturing industries.3 The consequent  expansion of the  tradeables sector  raised  its  productivity  through  internal  and  external  economies  of  scale;  
according to some estimates, undervaluation of 20 per cent on average during the 1950s and  
1960s may have raised the growth rate by perhaps 1 percentage point per year at thi s time  (Di Nino et al. 2010). 
Eichengreen  (1996)  argued  that  catch -up  growth  in  the  European  Golden  Age  was  
underpinned in many countries by a corporatist social contract which allowed a cooperative  
equilibrium in which wage restraint was rewarded by high  investment which benefited both  firms and their workers in the long run. A cross -country regression suggests that until the  
mid -1970s coordinated wage bargaining does appear to have raised investment and growth  
rates quite appreciably (Gilmore 2009) but th is was only to a very limited extent the case for  
Italy. Wage moderation in Italy lacked these institutional underpinnings and should rather be  
seen as a result of weak union bargaining power where, as Lewis (1954) might have put it,  
labour  supply  was  „unlimited‟  as  labour  was  re-deployed  out  of  agriculture.  But  the  high  degree  of  political  and  ideological  conflict  (Salvati  2000),  accompanied  by  the  ruthless  attitude  of  entrepreneurs  keen  to  exploit  their  bargaining  power,  made  this  equilibrium  potentially unstable. The first strike wave in the early 1960s and, to a much greater extent,  the  „hot  autumn‟  of  1969  signalled  the  end  of  this  phase.  The  subsequent  instability  of  industrial  relations  confirms  the  absence  of  the  institutions  of  a  co-ordinated  market economy. 
With  regard  to  domestic  supply-side  policy,  the  postwar  settlement  was  adequate  for  a  process of rapid catch-up for a „backward‟ economy to be launched but, later on, as Italy got  closer to the frontier, this was no longer the case. This is epitomized by a distinctive feature  of  Golden-Age  Italy,  namely,  the  state-owned  enterprises  IRI,  augmented  by  ENI  in  the  energy sector from 1953. Initially, public enterprises were a route to speeding up investment  and  were  given  high  managerial  autonomy  that  meant  they  could  achieve  economic  efficiency. In particular, IRI helped the development of the private machinery industry by  providing cheap intermediate inputs; compensating for the weakness of private firms in this  field was important. By the 1960s, however, public enterprises were increasingly hi-jacked  for  political  purposes  (Barca  et  al. 1998;  Woods  1998).  This  degenerative  process  also  involved the banks owned by IRI. Whereas in the 1950s and 1960s they allocated financial  resources efficiently, in subsequent years they were hampered in selecting innovative firms  by the growing influence of political networks. 
                                                            
3 
This was very much the case in the 1950s when for the industrial sector real wage and labour productivity  grew at 5.36 per cent and 5.06 per cent, respectively; it was less so in the 1960s when real wage and labour  productivity growth averaged 5.61 per cent and 4.45 per cent, respectively (Broadberry et al. 2010). 
9 

========9========

The postwar investment boom was largely financed from a high share of profits in national  income.  Italy  possessed  neither  a  CME  bank-based  nor  an  LME  equity-based  financial  system  but  one  in  which  corporate  governance  was  largely  based  on  family-controlled  pyramidal  groups, state-owned large firms and  banks which were themselves very largely  under state control (Pagano and Trento 2003). By the end of the Golden Age, as profits came  under pressure, this resulted in major problems for the operation and financing of large firms  (De Cecco and Ferri 2001).  
The  peak  of  the  Golden  Age  was  reached  in  1958-1963  with  the  culmination  of  the  „economic miracle‟ that had turned Italy into an industrial economy, but there were emerging  tensions that threatened instability, notably the potential conflict between sustaining growth  on the basis of low wages and demands for higher consumption resulting from the successful  economic development. 
In 1963, at the end of the “economic miracle”, monetary policy suddenly turned restrictive in  the face of mounting balance of payments disequilibria and inflation pressures. These latter  were driven by the first significant wage push in fifty years, in the context of the abatement  of unemployment and a resurgence of union militancy. The policy reaction was successful in  stopping  wage  increases  and  in  avoiding  a  much  feared  devaluation  and  the  economy  managed to return to an equilibrium (albeit slower) growth path until the beginning of the  next decade.  
In  retrospect,  1963  is  also  noteworthy  because  of  new  aspects  of  the  design  of  economic  policy similar in some ways to those emerging elsewhere in Europe. In many countries some  sort of vaguely Keynesian‐inspired income policies were attempted during the sixties (e.g.,  France, Denmark, Germany, United Kingdom). However, the most ambitious attempt was  put  forward  in  Italy,  when  the  socialist  party,  previously  under  the  communist  influence,  entered  the  government  in  1963,  forming  a  centre‐left  coalition.  Since  the  economy  had  grown at incredibly high rates in the previous  years, the  general assumption was that this  speed  could  easily  be  maintained  and  that  the  main  task  left  for  economic  policy  was  to  direct the  resources  produced  by  growth  to  favoured  objectives.  In  order  to  achieve  this  result a macroeconomic programme (programmazione) was designed in order to tackle the  main structural problems of the economy, namely, the North‐South gap, welfare, anti‐trust  regulation  and  company-law  reform.  Incomes  policy  would  ensure  the  sustainability  of  growth by preserving competitiveness and by keeping inflationary pressures under control.  With  the  programmazione there  was  also  an  attempt  to  render  industrial  relations  less  adversarial  by  involving  unions  in  discussions  about  the  compatibility  of  wage  dynamics  with macroeconomic objectives and to pave the way for a coordinated market economy.  
On the whole, the programme was heavily influenced by a dirigiste approach not uncommon  in the European economic culture of the time. But, somehow paradoxically, this was also  due to the intellectual contribution to the programmazione of the “liberal-socialisti”, a small  but very active group in the second half of the Fifties, aimed at introducing competition on  the  product  and  service  markets,  in  particular  in  the  public  utilities,  and  at  opening  the  structures of corporate governance of private firms. Both anticipated central themes of the  policy  debate  decades  later.  At  that  time,  the  latter  was  successfully  countered  by  the  employers‟ organisation. The competition issue was tackled by the proposal to dismantle the  existing  monopolies  not  by  ensuring  a  proper  competition-promoting  regulation  of  the  
10 

========10========

market but by nationalization of entire sectors. Whereas the case of failure of the market was  acknowledged, the case of failure of the State was still to be taken into consideration.  
The  policy  reform  proved  unrealistic,  however,  for  a  number  of  reasons.  On  the  macroeconomic  side,  the  momentum  of  growth  gradually  decreased.  On  the  whole,  firms  encountered significant difficulties in speeding up innovation to compensate for the waning  of the catch-up model based on „unlimited‟ labour supply and on technological transfer. The  growth  of fixed  investment,  mainly  aimed  at  implementing  labour  saving  technologies,  slowed down from 11 per cent on a yearly average in 1958-1963 to 5 per cent in 1964-1973.  Current  account  surpluses  (2 per  cent of  GDP  on  average  at  this  time)  were  matched  by  capital outflows surging to $1 billion annually (Biagioli 1995) The first, by changing relative  factor  intensity,  reflected  the  aim  of  containing  the  squeeze  of  profits  due  to  the  wage  increases  of  1961-1963;  the  second  was  the  result  not  only  of  the  search  for  financial  instruments  still  unavailable  on  the  Italian  market  but  also  to  a  considerable  extent  of  an  emerging fear of left-oriented policy measures.     
The reform design dragged on during the entire decade and was never implemented. Incomes  policy  proposals  ran  up  against  the  weakness  of  the  reform  culture  of  the  communist  opposition  (Magnani  1997b),  the  targets  set  by  the  programmazione  were  not  compatible  with  the  inefficiency  of  public  administration,  the  anti-trust  regulation  and  company-law  reform proposals were defeated by the consolidated interests of the large industrial groups  (Barca  1997a;  Ciocca  2007).  Moreover,  the  ambition  of  the  State  to  guide  the  market  in  strategic  directions  turned  into  a  radical  reduction  of  the  autonomy  of  economic  leaders,  more and more subordinated to the greed of political lobbies and parties. The progressive  contribution of state‐controlled enterprises came gradually to an end, accentuating the 1970s  crisis of large firms in the steel, energy and chemicals sectors which had led the convergence  of the Italian industrial structure during the Golden Age.  
The hot autumn of 1969 marked the clear failure of the incomes-policy approach advanced  by the centre-left governments. Within a few years, the Italian economy went through a huge  and persistent wage shock and through the oil shock. The macroeconomic context for reform  worsened  rapidly. Also,  the  development  policy  suffered  clear  setbacks  at  the  end  of  the  Sixties. The abolition of regionally-differentiated wage structures in national contracts raised  relative Southern labour costs and reduced wage flexibility, although a partial compensation  was found by charging employers‟ social-security contributions to the budget. Moreover, the  construction of the first pillars of a modern national welfare state, in particular, in terms of  pensions  and  health  service,  inevitably  tended  to  reduce  the  amount  of  public  resources  available for the special development policy.  
Was economic policy well-designed to exploit the favourable conditions of the Golden Age?   In  principle,  two  episodes  seem  particularly  relevant  in  answering  this  question,  namely,    the postwar settlement in 1946-48 and the centre-left turn in 1963. The former we take to be  mainly a product of the political circumstances of the time. The growth model that resulted  delivered extraordinary results up to the early 1960s, even by the standards of the time. At  the beginning of the Sixties political constraints were less severe, growth had produced an  unprecedented  volume  of  resources.  In  spite  of  its  contradictions,  the  turn  of  1963,  we  believe, represents a missed opportunity for reforms that would have improved subsequent  economic performance. 
11 

========11========

The failure in 1963 to adapt institutions, regulations and the scope of public intervention in  the economy to the new circumstances created by growth (end of the unlimited supply of  labour, congestion costs, formation of a significant working class in the North, resurgence of  union militancy) may be thought of as a clear reflection of a long-standing feature of Italian  economic  policy,  i.e.,  the  weakness  of  the  reform  policy  culture,  squeezed  between  the  “alternative to the system”, at that time cautiously but nonetheless firmly put forward by the  main  opposition party on the one hand and the defence of diffused particular interests on the  other.  
12 

========12========

3. From the 1970s to the 1990s 
After the early 1970s, growth slowed down quite markedly right across Europe, as Table 7  reports.  The  end  of  the  Golden  Age  had  a  number  of  unavoidable  aspects  including  the  exhaustion of transitory components of fast growth such as postwar reconstruction, reduced  opportunities  to  redeploy  labour  out  of  agriculture,  narrowing  of  the  technology  gap,  and  diminishing  returns  to  investment.  TFP  growth  slowed  down  markedly.  Moreover,  the  United States itself experienced a productivity  growth slowdown. All-in-all, the scope for  catch-up  growth was much reduced,  although by  no means  eliminated.  In addition, in the  face of both internal labour militancy and external oil-price shocks together with the collapse  of  the  discipline  of  the  fixed  exchange  rate  system  macroeconomic  policymaking  became  much more difficult. 
Indeed, from the end of the Golden Age, Western Europe‟s catch-up of the United States in  terms of real GDP per person stalled. The European level was 68.3 per cent of the American  level in 1973, 68.6 per cent in 1995 and 68.2 per cent in 2007. The picture in terms of labour  productivity was different. Catch-up in terms of real GDP per hour worked continued until  the mid-1990s and the European level rose from 63.3 per cent of the American level in 1973  to 85.1 per cent in 1995 but then retreated to 76.5 per cent by 2007. From the 1970s to the  mid-1990s the discrepancy comes from a decrease in the amount of work done by Europeans  compared with Americans, accounted for by a combination of rising unemployment, earlier  retirement and longer holidays. The implications for economic welfare depend on how far  these  outcomes  result  from  differences  in  preferences  or  distortions  to  markets  from  regulations, taxes etc. This remains unclear (Faggio and Nickell 2007). 
Italy has had a similar experience but with some distinctive features; real GDP per person  was 63.7 per cent of the level in the United States both in 1973 and in 2007 but had been  higher at 69.9 per cent in 1995. The gap in labour productivity between Italy and the United  States narrowed quite steadily between the end of the Golden Age and the mid-1990s but  then widened appreciably; the ratio was 64.9 per cent in 1973, 81.8 per cent in 1995 and 67.6  per cent in 2007. The idiosyncratic Italian aspects that are a cause for concern are low female  employment and high levels of inactivity among males over 55. These aspects have been a  persistent  feature  of  recent  decades  and  do,  at  least  partly,  reflect  distortions.  Together,  inflexibilities in labour markets that deny part-time employment opportunities and relatively  low education attainments account for most of the difference in female employment levels  compared with the European average (Del Boca et al. 2004) while early retirement for men  
13 

========13========

has been heavily incentivized by the pension system and an astonishingly high implicit tax  on working after the age of 60 (Duval 2003).4 
Although catch -up of the United States in term s of labour productivity continued, the rate of  
convergence  slowed  down  (Crafts  2007).  European  countries  struggled  to  cope  with  the  
aftermath of the macroeconomic turbulence of the 1970s, to embrace creative destruction in  
the  context  of  the  need  to  adjus t  to  a  changing  world  economy  and  to  achieve  rapid  
productivity  growth  in  the  increasingly  dominant  services  sector.  The  Eichengreen  wage - moderation  model  broke  down  (Cameron  and  Wallace  2002;  Gilmore  2009)  while  
regulation, taxation and expenditure on soc ial transfers increased. While these policy shifts  
were understandable in the context of the pressures of the time and the legacy of the social  
contracts  of  the  earlier  postwar  period,  they  tended  to  slow  growth  down.  Kneller  et  al. (1999) estimated that an increase of 1 percentage point in the ratio of distortionary taxes to  GDP  slowed  growth  by  0.1  percentage  point.  Employment  protection  impeded  growth  in  sectors intensive in the use of human capital and more innovative sectors (Conti and Sulis  2010). Product  market  regulation  that  inhibited  competition  slowed  catch-up  in  TFP  (Nicoletti and Scarpetta 2005). Tables 8, 9, and 10 indicate that there was cause for concern. 
This account has resonance for  Italy where the  Golden-Age  growth model had run out of  steam. The  service-sector  now  had  a  much  increased  weight  and  its  performance  became  increasingly important. From 1973 to 1993, the share of employment in services rose from  43.9 to 62.2 per cent while the share in industry fell from 38.4 to 31.3 per cent but service- sector  labour  productivity  growth  averaged  only  0.5  per  cent  per  year  during  this  period  (Broadberry et al. 2010) and economy-wide TFP growth fell to 1.2 per cent per year.  
In fact, Italy was notable in this period for a very high level of employment protection (Table  8),  was  slow  to  relax  product-market  regulation  (Table  9)  and  hampered  by  regulatory  procedures  and  costs,  relatively  high  barriers  to  entry  (Klapper et  al. 2006,  Bianco et  al. 2011). The estimates in Nicoletti and Scarpetta (2005) suggest that slowness to deregulate  product  markets  cost  Italy  about  0.7  percentage  points  per  year  in  the  1980s  and  1990s  compared  with  adopting  a  stance  similar  to  the  most  liberal  OECD  country  while  the  estimates in Caballero et al. (2004) imply that employment protection slowed adjustment in  Italy and has a labour productivity growth cost of about 0.3 percentage points per year in the  period 1980 to 1998 compared with the economy with the least employment protection. 
At the beginning of the 1970s, several factors tended in Europe to reduce optimal firm size  (minimum  efficient  scale):  the  crisis  of  the  Fordist  organization  of  labour  due  to  the  antagonistic  attitude  of  workers  in  large  firms  and  their  demands  for  higher  wages,  the  diversification  and  specialization  of  demand,  technological  innovations  which  made  equipment capital more flexible, and reduced benefits of vertical integration of production. 
                                                            
4 
Gordon (2008) points out that state-sponsored early retirement has very high costs in terms of reduced  consumption which are clearly much greater than any gain in terms of additional leisure time. 
14 

========14========

International  competition  was  now  based  more  on  product  innovations  and  less  on  standardized mass production, notably in automobiles (Bianchi 2002). 
These  factors  lay  at  the  heart  of  the  so  called  flexible-specialization  model  (Sabel  1982).  Italian  industry  shared  these  general  tendencies  with  particular  intensity  for  two  reasons.  First, industrial structure was already characterized in the 1950s and 1960s by a relatively  large share of small- and medium-size firms and by  the prominence of  industrial districts  (Brusco  and  Paba  1997).  Second,  after  the  “hot  autumn”,  large  firms  reacted  by  de- centralizing production because of rapidly increasing rigidities emerging in the production  process at the shop-floor level.  
The emergence of new small- and medium-size enterprises was concentrated mostly in their  historical  locations  in  the  Centre  and  the  North,  shaping  a sort  of  “regionalized  model  of  capitalism”  based  on  agglomeration  economies,  on  local  networks  and  non-market  mechanisms of coordination (Trigilia and Burroni 2009), as well as on the accumulation of  tacit  knowledge  (Antonelli  and  Barbiellini-Amidei  2009). By  contrast,  the  weakness  of  indigenous  entrepreneurship  – the  main  failure  of  the  special  development policy  – prevented the growth of flexible small-medium size firms in the South. 
These  latter  (20-50  employees)  were  the  main  support  of  growth  in  industry  during  the  1970s,  in  the  face  of  policy  failures  and  growing  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Their  performance  in  terms  of  productivity,  investment,  production  and  profits  turned  out  to  be  significantly better than that of large firms (Barca and Magnani 1989). Italy did, therefore,  find a partial solution to mitigate inflexibility.  
New social demands emerged. They were met by a progressive widening of the fiscal deficit.  The level of Italian public debt had remained almost stationary until the end of the 1960s,  well  below  40 per  cent of  GDP.  By  1980  it  reached  60 per  cent and  in  1994,  at  its  peak  before the recent financial crisis, it amounted to 125 per cent of the national product (Fig.1).  Italy is the only major European country where, after the substantial reduction registered in  the first years after WW2, public debt relative to GDP climbed back to the values recorded  in the second quarter of the century. 
This rise stemmed from the strong increases of primary expenditures in the first half of the  seventies (from 31.2 per cent in 1970 to 37.6 per cent of GDP in 1975), which, however, still  remained below the levels registered in France and Germany. Social transfers rose from 13.1 per cent GDP in 1960 to 18 per cent GDP by 1980 (Table 10). Italy looks similar to many  other European countries regarding the expansion of welfare, even if the gap to be filled with  regard to demands for social spending was wider, given the low initial conditions. What is  distinctive in Italy is that the adjustment was made by keeping fiscal pressure constant and  thus by  allowing  a fiscal deficit to emerge which over time led to a  rapid increase in the  public debt to GDP ratio (Balassone et al. 2010). In the first half of the 1970s, intense social  conflict discouraged counterbalancing revenue increases. It was politically more viable to let  
15 

========15========

public  debt,  inflation  and  the  fiscal  drag  do  the  job  of  finding  a  new  though  unstable  macroeconomic equilibrium.  
Moreover,  the  composition  of  revenues  became  less  favourable.  Table  10  reports  a  substantial rise in distortionary taxation between the mid 1960s and the mid 1990s which  went  along  with  higher  social  transfers  but  also  reflects  the  increased  outlays  for  interest  payments  on  the  public  debt.  Research  by  the  OECD  suggests  that  a  growth-friendly  tax  system will have low rates of corporate tax and collect a high proportion of its revenue from  consumption taxes (Johansson et al. 2008). In both these respects, Italy was relatively badly  placed. Against the general European trend, corporate income tax rates increased from 36  per cent at the end of the 1970s to 52 per cent in the mid 1990s while Italy had the lowest C- efficiency score for value-added tax in Europe.  
The broad profile of monetary policies was similar in Italy and abroad; a tendency towards  accommodation (actually more pronounced in Italy), followed at the end of the Seventies by  a  more  restrictive  stance  in  the  context  of  the  “Volcker  turn”  and  participation  in  the  European monetary system. According to the Governor of the Bank of Italy, Guido Carli,  (Banca  d‟Italia  1975)  monetary  policy  couldn‟t  react  effectively  to  the  slackening  fiscal  discipline because this would have amounted to a “seditious act” against the State5. In fact,  driven by enormous nominal wage increases (17 per cent on a yearly basis between 1971 and  1975; real wages increased by almost 5 per cent a year), the oil shock and the devaluation of  the lira, prices exploded.  
However,  some  authors  believe  that  the  degree  of  freedom  in  shaping  macroeconomic  policies was actually higher. Spinelli and Fratianni (1991), Andreatta and d‟Adda (1985) and  Onofri and Basevi (1997) underline that with a more market oriented policy culture it would  have  been  possible  to  implement  more  virtuous  policies  in  the  aftermath  of  the  first  oil  shock, as other European countries did. Their critique is severe; Italian economic policy in  the Seventies was basically founded on the irrelevance of the public budget constraint, on the  dependence  of  monetary  policy  on  budget  needs  and  on  a  dirigiste approach  of  public  interventions.  
Giavazzi and Spaventa (1989) argue instead that Italian macro-policy in the second half of  the Seventies reduced the costs of disinflation later, because it delivered high profit margins  and  financed  new  capital  equipment  such  that  pressure  could  be  more  easily  exerted  on  industry to reduce costs. Boltho (1986), noting the still positive growth differential between  Italy and the other advanced economies, supports this argument, by pointing to the beneficial  effects  of  expansionary  policy  during  the  whole  decade  on  the  development  of  small  and  medium size firms.  
                                                            
5 
With the support of the IMF there was a serious attempt in 1974 to impose monetary restriction as had been  successfully done in 1963; however, in spite of initial improvements in the balance of payments and in inflation  in the subsequent cyclical recovery,  the monetary stance soon turned permissive.  
16 

========16========

In the second half of the seventies, in the middle of a dramatic crisis threatening the very  survival of democracy, the participation of the communist party in the coalition supporting  the  government  (1976‐1979:  “governi  di  solidarietà  nazionale”)  allowed  a  deceleration  of  inflation and public debt growth;  the willingness, albeit cautious, of trade unions to take into  account  the  compatibility  of    wage  dynamics  with    macroeconomic  equilibrium  induced  wage  moderation,  increased  profits  and  indirectly  supported  technological  restructuring  processes. In 1979, the coalition broke up. Within a short time span, entrepreneurs regained  control of production processes in large firms, strengthened by the substantial labour‐saving  process innovations undertaken in the preceding years (Barca and Magnani 1989). 
Around 1980, three events marked a turning‐point in economic policy: the participation in  the European Monetary System, the Bank of Italy‐Treasury “divorce” (by which the Bank  was freed from the obligation of buying the unsold public debt at Treasury auctions), which   was aimed at inducing virtuous behaviour by the public sector by through increasing the cost  of  issuing  new  debt,  and  the  introduction  of  a  form  of  incomes policy,  through  the  predetermination of automatic inflation‐related pay rises in order to guide price expectations.  The first decision represented an attempt to “force” a reduction of costs in the sector exposed  to foreign competition via a partial and delayed realignment of the nominal exchange rate in  response to the appreciation of the real exchange rate. The effectiveness of this policy with  respect to that implemented in the first half of the 1970s is clearly shown by the different  price dynamics after the two oil shocks in 1973 and 1979.  
In  the  1980s,  the  conditions  for  addressing  macroeconomic  disequilibria  looked  more  favourable than in the 1970s. Governments could rely on stable majorities. The drastic fall in  oil prices reduced inflation and increased, ceteris paribus, available resources. After 1983,  the major economies entered a long expansionary cycle. The “wage‐push age” was definitely  over  and  the  concept  of  incomes  policy  (Tarantelli  1981)  was,  even  if  painfully,  gaining  some  ground6.  Monetary  policy,  by  pursuing  flexibly  an  exchange  rate  target,  was an  important factor in reducing inflation from 1979 to 1986 (Gressani, Guiso and Visco 1987). 
The adjustment was, however, incomplete. Inflation reached a low point in 1987 of slightly  
less than 5 per cent after the fall of oil prices but rose back to 6 per cent at the beginning of  the nineties, two percentage points more than the European average, mainly because of the  
existence of strong competition barriers in the non ‐traded sector (Barca and Visco 1993) and  a still excessive wage growth. During 1985‐1991, the nominal exchange rate changed little;  competitiveness, measured by goods prices, worsened by 12 per cent, in terms of unit labour  costs by more than 15 per cent. The current account, balanced in 1986, weakened gradually  to a deficit of 2 per cent of GDP in 1991. Firms were slow to react to competitive pressure  
                                                            
6 
   However, the degree of the difficulties in progressing along this road is indicated by the fact that the main  instigator of these proposals, Ezio Tarantelli, was assassinated by left-wing terrorists in 1986. 
17 

========17========

by  improving  the  quality  of  products  and  shifting  towards  more  innovation‐intensive  production. 
The  major obstacle  to  complete  adjustment  was  the  inability  to  deal  with  the  public  debt  problem. Programmes to reduce deficits were regularly discarded. Though there was some  progress  in  the  final  years  of  the  decade,  primary  deficits  generally  remained  substantial  (Fig.2). Public debt rose further from 60 percent of GDP in 1980 to more than 100 per cent in 1991. The foreign sector purchased significant amounts of State bonds attracted by the  stability of the exchange rate and high interest rates. The negative net investment position of  the country climbed up to more than 10 per cent of GDP.  
The long-term implications of allowing the debt ratio to increase so much are unfavourable  for growth, as is highlighted in particular by growth models of the overlapping-generations  variety.  The  adverse  impacts  can  occur  through  a  number  of  transmission  mechanisms  including reductions in market-sector capital formation, higher long-term interest rates and  higher tax rates. Empirical research on advanced economies has found negative effects; for  example, Kumar and Woo (2010) estimate that a 10 percentage point increase in the initial  debt to GDP ratio is associated with a fall of about 0.2 percentage points in growth. It has  also been suggested that the adverse effect on growth becomes substantial once the debt ratio  reaches a critical level which has recently been claimed to be around 90 per cent of GDP  (Checherita and Rother 2010). 
The  risks  inherent  in  the  rising  public  debt  ratio  were  clearly  perceived,  as  shown  by  the  continuous attempts to reduce the fiscal unbalances. There was no effective policy reaction  because  of  the  structural  weakness  of  political  power,  more  and  more  dependent  on  a  multitude  of  powerful  interest  groups,  unions  often  included.7 The  failure  to  address  t he  increase in public debt in a far better macroeconomic context than that of the 1970s must to  
be considered as a major missed opportunity. 
In  the  period  between  the  end  of  the  Golden  Age  and  the  beginning  of  the  Nineties  the  
special development policy fo r the South got into growing difficulties; the reduction of the  
income  gap  came  to  a  halt.  The  oil  shock,  the  changing  technological  and  competitive  
framework, and the increased  rigidity of the labour market made this policy less and less  
effective (Iuzzol ino  et al. 2011). The progressive decline of IRI disproportionately reduced  the efficiency of investments in the South, where the State-controlled firms played a decisive  role.  A  similar  degeneration  process  undermined  the  Cassa  per  il  Mezzogiorno,  whose  technical autonomy and authority were put in question. Last, but not least, the attribution of  
                                                            
7 
This  historical  feature  of  Italian  society  is  sharpened  especially  by  the  progressive  loss  of  influence  of  traditional popular parties, in particular – but  not only – the  Christian Democratic party that  had ruled the  country  since  1945,  which  in  the  past  had  managed  at  least  partially  to  reconcile  the  different  demands  by  taking into account the conditions for sustainable growth. 
18 

========18========

relevant  powers  to  the  newly  constituted  Regions  increased  significantly  the  costs  of  coordination of regional policies and made local lobbies more powerful.  
Special  development  policy  tended  gradually  to  replace  rather  than  add  resources  to  the  ordinary  State  policy.  From  the  beginning  of  the  Seventies  up  to  1992,  total  net  current  public transfers in the South became more negative by 3 percentage points of its GDP, from -3.5 to -6.5 but in the rest of the country they plunged from -13 to -20 per cent of GDP  of  these  regions.  Including  labour  income,  in  the  South  often  reflecting  a  disguised  social  assistance  policy,  net  public  resources  flowing  to  the  South  increased  slightly  from  11  to  almost 12 per cent of GDP; those pouring out from the Centre-North from -3 to -10 per cent  of  GDP  (Magnani  1997a).  The  divergence  in  public  net  flows  was  not  due  mainly  to  expenditures but to taxes, these latter directly related to the level of incomes in the two parts  of  the  country.  However,  what  matters  more  is  the  fact  that  the  composition  of  public  expenditure  flowing  into  the  South  started  to  shift  more  and  more  in  favour  of  current  transfers and labour income, with negative effects on the growth prospects of the Southern  economy on the one hand and the national public budget on the other (Cannari and Chiri  2006;  Staderini  and  Vadalà  2009).  An  implicit  redistribution  of  resources  therefore  took  place in the aftermath of the extension of the welfare state to the whole country. From being  a factor supporting Italian growth, the relative stagnation of South gradually became a drain  on public resources. 
To sum up, supply side adjustments in the 1970s were much more limited than elsewhere in  Europe because of the policy constraints resulting from the social and political emergency.  In the subsequent decade, the long shadow of the Seventies mainly took the form of a lack of  political leadership in subduing the pressure of interest groups which was a precondition for  ensuring a sustainable path for the public finances. The crisis of 1992 exploded because of a  combination  of  factors  affecting  the  whole  EMS  (Eichengreen  2000)  and  the  failure  to  correct  the  above-mentioned  disequilibria.  Italy  was  forced  to  exit  the  EMS.  This  crisis  finally did induce some long overdue macro adjustments. 
19 

========19========

4. From the 1990s to the Eve of the Crisis 
After the mid-1990s the western European catch-up of the United States in terms of labour  productivity ceased. Whereas between 1973 and 1995 real GDP/hour worked grew at 2.6 per  cent per year in Europe and 1.3 per cent in the United States between 1995 and 2007 these  growth rates were 1.2 and 2.1 per cent, respectively. So, the end of catch-up reflected both  European slowing down and American speeding up. At about this point, employment started  to grow faster than population in Europe but it no longer did so in the United States and the  potential  of  ICT  for  productivity  increased  considerably,  a  potential  that  was  more  fully  realized by the American than the European economy. ICT expenditure as a share of GDP  averaged 2.2 per cent in the late 1990s compared with 4.0 per cent in the United States and  in Sweden (Timmer and van Ark, 2005) and productivity growth was especially weak in the  service sector, averaging only 0.2 per cent year between 1993 and 2007 (Broadberry et al. 2010),  where  ICT  had  strong  effects  in  the  United  States.  These  developments  were  important as proximate sources of the turn round in relative productivity performance. 
To quite a large extent, productivity growth in Italy reflected these tendencies. The growth of  real GDP per hour worked fell from 2.35 per cent in 1973-95 to 0.46 per cent in 1995-2007  while  the  growth  of  hours  worked  per  person  went  from -0.14  to  +0.87  (Table  11).  This  latter can be expected to have reduced labour productivity growth in the short to medium  term if investment failed to respond and the additional workers were lower quality; (Dew- Becker and Gordon 2008). Nevertheless, productivity growth was very disappointing even  by European standards, suggesting that there was more to it than this. 
This  poor  performance  came  even  though  Italy  went  through  a  period  of  major  policy  reforms  during  the  1990s  including  privatization,  anti-trust,  banking  and  company  law  reforms which seemed appropriate as moves in the direction of reform required by a higher  level of economic development. The 1992 crisis added momentum to reform and “the entire  political system born after World War II came to an end” (Pagano and Trento 2003, p.199).  The  big  devaluation  of  the  lira  in  1992-1995  delivered  a  sharp  improvement  of  competitiveness  and  confidence  was  for  the  time  being  restored. Significant  progress  was  made in reducing the public debt to GDP ratio which declined from 125 per cent in 1994 to  103 per cent in 2004.  
We need, therefore, to confront the puzzle of why growth performance deteriorated rather  than improved. There seem to be two key reasons for this. First, Italy was relatively badly  placed to exploit the opportunities of the ICT era. The diffusion of this new technology was  hindered by the small size of firms, oppressive regulation, and shortfalls in human capital by  comparison with the European leaders in the take up of ICT. Second, supply-side reform did  not go far enough especially given the context of joining the Eurozone. In several respects,  including  the  legal  system,  competition  policy,  regulation  and  privatization,  reforms  were  either incomplete or inadequately implemented. 
20 

========20========

The  international  evidence  is  that  the  diffusion  of  ICT  has  been  significantly  inhibited  in  countries  which  are  heavily  regulated.  Employment  protection  has  been  shown  to  deter  investment  in  ICT  equipment  (Gust  and  Marquez  2004)  because  reorganizing  working  practices  and  upgrading  the  labour  force,  which  are  central  to  realizing  the  productivity  potential  of  ICT,  are  made  more  expensive.  Restrictive  product  market  regulation  has  deterred investment in ICT capital directly (Conway et al. 2006) and the indirect effect of  regulation in raising costs has been relatively pronounced in sectors that use ICT intensively.  There has been a strong correlation between product market regulation and the contribution  of  ICT-using  services  (notably  distribution)  to  overall  productivity  growth  (Nicoletti  and  Scarpetta  2005).  The  general  story  is  not  that  regulation  has  become  more  stringent  but  rather that existing regulation became more costly in the context of a new technological era.  
This account clearly has resonance for Italy. Italy entered the ICT era with relatively high  levels of regulation, albeit decreasing over time as reforms took place (Tables 8 and 9). The  estimates in Tables 12 and 13 indicate that investment in intangible capital has been low and  that the productivity growth contributions both of ICT capital and also of intangible capital  have  been  very  modest. International  comparisons  confirm  that  ICT  investment  has  been  held back in Italy by regulation and a shortfall in human capital (Conway et al. 2006).     
Microeconomic  studies  of  Italian  manufacturing  confirm  this  picture  while  adding  further  insights as to why diffusion of ICT had been relatively slow in Italy. The take-up of ICT has  been strongly correlated with firm size and changes in organizational structure (Fabiani et al. 2005).  In  this  context,  Bugamelli  and  Pagano  (2004)  found  that  many  firms  appear  to  be  constrained in their ICT investment by the adjustment costs associated with reorganization,  especially  if  their  workforce  has  relatively  low  levels  of  human  capital.  These  reflect  regulatory burdens but, because they are fixed costs, they bear very heavily on the small- and  medium-size firms that have been central to Italy‟s distinctive variety of capitalism.8 
Turning to supply-side  policy reforms, there are a number of shortfalls that deserve to be  highlighted. One major point is that their effectiveness in promoting competition has been  insufficient.  The  retail  sector  is  an  important  example.  Labour  productivity  growth  in  retailing was 0.8 percent per year in 1995-2002 compared with 7.4 per cent in the United  States  and  1.6  per  cent  in  the  EU15  (McGuckin et  al. 2005).  It  is  clear  that  productivity  performance  was  still  impaired  by  regulation;  barriers  to  entry  and  mark-ups  in  retailing  remained  high  on  average  with  adverse  consequences  for  TFP  (Daveri  et  al. 2010).  However, in districts where competition was stimulated by the 1998 regulatory reform both  ICT investment and labour productivity increased (Schivardi and Viviano 2011).  
The competition-policy  framework established in the 1990s has been rated below average  relative to OECD countries using criteria relating to political independence, toughness and  
                                                            
8 
In the mid-1990s, mean employment in Italian manufacturing firms was only 42 per cent of the EU15 average  (Pagano and Schivardi 2003).  
21 

========21========

investigative  powers  with  the  implication  that  productivity  growth  has  been  adversely  affected  (Buccirossi et  al. 2009),  low-efficiency  producers  continued  to  survive  in  many  sectors (Milana et al. 2008), and mark-ups in the service sector as a whole remained high  (Table  9).  Failure  to  de-regulate  professional  services,  where  in  2008  Italy  still  had  the  tightest product-market regulation in Europe after Luxembourg, has had significant adverse  effects  on  the  productivity  of  sectors  for  which  they  are  important  inputs  (Barone  and  Cingano  2011). On  the  contrary,  the  reform  process  was  successful  in  the  banking  sector  where competition increased significantly.     
The volume of privatization in Italy was impressive; in terms of the proceeds, second only to  the UK during the period 1979 to 1999. However, it was mainly aimed at reducing public  debt.  Only  30  per  cent  of  the  value  of  transactions  involved  a  transfer  of  control,  opportunities to introduce competition in utilities like electricity and gas were missed, and  regulation  was  inadequate.  There  were  improvements  in  operating  efficiency  in  sectors  exposed to competition but not in sheltered sectors where it appears that privatization was  simply  conducive  to  increased  quasi  rents  as  market  power  was  exploited  more  fully  (Barucci and Pierobon 2007).9 
While,  on  the  surface,  reforms  to  corporate  governance  might  h ave  enabled    an  effective  market  for  corporate  control,  in  practice  changes  in  ownership  and  control  structures  
(pyramids  have  been  replaced  by  coalitions)  have  been  quite  limited,  private  benefits  of  
control seem to have remained high, and the number of l isted companies has increased only  slightly (Bianchi and Bianco 2006) .  Bloom and van Reenen (2008) found that the quality of  management in Italian companies in 2006 was below leading international standards, largely  
as  a  result  of  weak  competition  and  fami ly  control,  with  adverse  implications  for  productivity  performance.  The  effectiveness  of  company  law  reforms  has  been  limited  by  
established  interests  and  the  deep  rooted  Italian  difficulty  of  linking  economic  and  legal  
culture (Ciocca 2007). 
The  supply -si de  reform  agenda  has  been  also  undermined  by  the  inadequacy  of  the  legal  
system (Bianco  et al. 2008; Carmignani and Giacomelli 2010) and the ineffectiveness of the  government. The low rankings of Italy in the World Bank‟s Governance Indicators reported  in Table 14 underline this point. Similarly, Italy has a low „ease of doing business‟ ranking  (80th in the most recent year) in the World Bank‟s Doing Business report with enforcement  of contracts seen as especially poor (157th)10. 
Other important factors forlong run growth are of course less responsive to policy, at least in  the short run. In spite of progress, especially after WWII, the gap in human capital, measured  
                                                            
9 
Sheltered sectors include energy companies, banks, municipal utilities, airport management companies,  Autostrade, and Telecom Italia. 
10 
It should be recognized thatthere are substantial regional variations in bureaucratic burdens on business  within Italy; they are generally more onerous in the South and the Islands (Bianco and Bripi 2010). 
22 

========22========

by the number of years of education, remained significant compared with the other advanced  countries. The percentage of persons aged 25 to 64 who attained at least an upper secondary  education was around 32 per cent in the second half of the 1990s, almost ten points below  OECD average. With respect to tertiary education, the gap widened: 12 per cent vis-a-vis 24 per cent (OECD 2010).  
Whereas in terms of the quantity of education Italy has slowly caught up, quality has lagged  behind.  The  evidence  provided  by  student  competencies  is  quite  clear  in  this  regard.  The  picture is especially worrying with regard to cognitive skills as measured by performance in  international tests such as the OECD PISA studies. Italy now ranks very low, especially in  mathematics, and its average performance has been declining steadily since the mid-1970s in  stark  contrast  with  countries  like  Finland  and  Sweden  (Hanushek  and  Woessmann  2009).  The  econometric  evidence  suggests  that  this  has  exacted  a  serious  penalty  in  terms  of  an  adverse effect on growth. 
Among  the  possible  reasons  for  the  relatively  low  quality  of  education  in  Italy,  we  must  exclude a shortfall in educational spending; on the contrary, Italy spends more per student  than many countries which achieve much better results. Instead, a relaxation of educational  standards in the 1970s and an inability to achieve coherent reforms seem to have played a  significant role (Bertola and Sestito 2011). Moreover, international comparisons show that  efficiency  of  schooling  resources  is  enhanced  by  accountability,  autonomy  in  hiring  decisions,  and  effective  competition  within the  school  system  which  all  raise  standards  (Woesmann et al. 2007). The issue is the organization of the school system which has been  ineffective  in  addressing  principal-agent  problems  in  the  delivery  of  education.  Examined  through  this  lens,  Italy  has  lagged  behind  other  countries  especially  in  terms  of  lack  of  autonomy  of  schools  in  providing  incentives  and  sanctions  to  teachers;  in  recent  years,  accountability has been weakened through not having external exit exams (Boarini 2007). In  the  Golden  Age,  given  the  prevailing  technology,  the  lack  of  formal  education  was  not  a  serious  constraint  on  growth  because  informal  knowledge  formation  such  as  on-the-job  training compensated. However, at more advanced stages of technological development, the  gaps  in  formal  education,  in  particular  tertiary  education,  have  mattered  because  it  is  essential in fostering innovation (Bertola and Sestito 2011). 
Another  important  structural  factor  potentially  hindering  growth  is  Italy‟s  „anomalous‟  position in international trade which has its roots in the strength of small and medium-sized  firms  producing  in  industrial  districts  (De  Benedictis  2005).  Revealed  comparative  advantage  for  Italy  exhibits  high  persistence.  Compared  with  other  G7  economies  Italy‟s  exports remain skewed towards low-tech  and labour-intensive sectors such as textiles and  footwear  and  away  from  hi-tech  activities.  This  means  that  Italy  is  more  exposed  to  
23 

========23========

competition  from  China  and  other  dynamic  Asian  economies  and  is  less  well-placed  to  benefit from fast-growing sectors in world trade (Lissovlik 2008) while export performance,  especially in distant markets, is held back by the small average size of Italian firms (Barba- Navaretti et al. 2011). 
The implications of the historical legacy reflected in this trade configuration should not be  exaggerated. The „market-crowding‟ impact on export growth has been much smaller than  relatively slow growth in the EU15 (Italy‟s main market), and trends in the real exchange  rate (Breinlich and Tucci 2010). There has been an adverse trend in the terms of external  trade but the effect only reduced real income growth by 0.1 percentage point over the ten  years  to  2006  (Bennett  et  al. 2008).  Over  time,  however,  the  Italian  economy  is  being  subjected  to  a  greater  need  to  adjust  to the  changing  international  division  of  labour  than  countries like France, Germany or the UK. The big issue here concerns the flexibility of the  relatively  Italian  economy;  an  index  recently  compiled  by  OECD  economists  places  Italy  24th out of 26 countries in terms of ability to cope with globalization.11 
European integration moved forward in the 1990s culminating in the establishment of the  European Monetary Union in 1999 .  Despite forced exit from EMS in 1992, Italy became a  founder -member of the Eurozone.  The decision to join EMU sought to introduce competitive  pressures into the system in order to stimulate efficiency improvements and thus to promote  growth  even  in  the  short  run  via  a  general  improvement  of  expectations,  thereby  counterbalancing at least p artially the deflationary effects of the huge correction to the public  deficit implemented in order to join EMU. 
In conjunction with the decision to participate in EMU, a radical reform of regional policy  took place, benefiting from the strong EU commitment to regional and social convergence.  The basic aim was to spur growth of the whole country by refuelling the catching-up process  of the South, which had been interrupted in the 1970s, to offset the loss of the exchange-rate  policy instrument and the severe fiscal clampdown to meet the Maastricht criteria. A new  regional policy was launched, centred on a place-based approach which looked at innovation  as the primary driver of development so as to enhance the potential comparative advantages  of the Southernregions.  
Participation  in  EMU  was  a  major  change  in  the  framework  for  macroeconomic  policy:  inflation and nominal interest rates converged rapidly towards the European average. For the  first time in 30 years, price stabilization was finally achieved.  
It also  had,  however,  supply-side  implications  through  the  intensification  of  competition.  EMU membership can be thought of as a commitment technology; put differently, „Italian  vices are overcome by importing European virtues‟, as Guido Carli, Governor of the Bank of  
                                                            
11 
The index reflects regulation, education and skills, labour market flexibil active labour market programmes (Rae and Sollie 2007). 
ity, the innovation framework and  
24 

========24========

Italy,  1960-1975,  and  Minister  of  the  Treasury,  1989-1992,  emphasized  retrospectively  (Carli 1996). With better macroeconomic discipline, interest-rate convergence, and improved  prospects  for  fiscal  sustainability,  investment  could  respond  positively.  Overall,  then,  it  might  be  hoped  that  joining  the  Euro  could  be  good  for  growth.  In  any  event,  Italy‟s  participation in EMU amounted to achieving the goal of the postwar  generation of  Italian  leaders, anxious to anchor Italy within Europe. It was ultimately a political decision as it was  the creation of EMU. 
At the same time, EMU membership was not a risk-free strategy, especially for a country  with weak productivity growth and a high public debt to GDP ratio, given that the Eurozone  is  not  an  optimal  currency  area  and  the  European  Central  Bank‟s  choice  of  interest  rates  might not be ideal from an Italian point of view. There clearly were dangers from a loss of  international  competitiveness  and  this  has  materialized.  During  1999-2009,  the  real  exchange rate measured by prices of production in the manufacturing industry appreciated  by 7.5 percentage points, compared with an appreciation of 5 points in France and no change  in Germany. The loss of competitiveness in the whole economy measured in terms of unit  labour costs was higher at 13 percentage points, compared with a loss of 5 percentage points  for France and a gain of 13 percentage points for Germany.  
Ex-post, the experience of EMU membership has been much less comfortable than had been  hoped  ex-ante.  The  benefit  to  fiscal  sustainability  anticipated  from  reduction  of  the  gap  between the interest rate and the growth rate is threatened by the ineffectiveness of supply- side reform, weak productivity performance, the loss of competitiveness, and fears about the  political  will  to  maintain  budget  discipline.  Investment  and  growth  are  potentially  undermined  rather  than  stimulated  by  a  high  real  exchange  rate  and  debt  overhang.  The  growth rate up to the outbreak of the financial crisis (1999‐2008) was half of that of the Euro  area and of the average for the period 1980‐1999.  
One  question  obviously  arises.  Did  a  superior  policy  alternative  exist?  Would  growth  prospects have been more favourable in the case of non-participation? Would it have been  easier to implement the  necessary structural  adjustments? The analysis put forward in the  previous sections suggests that the answer to all these questions is no. The experience of the  1970s  is  especially  helpful  in  this  regard.  At  that  time,  the  structural  weaknesses of  the  Italian  economy,  though  less  relevant  because  of  the  more  favourable  competitive  and  technological context, were already quite evident. The (much-used) freedom of manoeuvre  granted  by  the  floating  exchange  rate  did  not  trigger  any  substantial  policy  interventions  aimed  at  correcting  them.  On  the  contrary,  the  outcome  was  an  unstable  macroeconomic  framework marked by inflation and fiscal laxity, two factors notably pernicious for growth  in  the  medium-long  run.  Either  inside  or  outside  EMU,  supply-side  reforms  conducive  to  raising the rate of productivity growth were required; the pressure to make them would have  been weaker without the prospect of joining the Euro. On the other hand, the consequence of  
25 

========25========

not  reforming  well  enough  may  eventually  be  more  severe  if  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  is  precipitated.  
26 

========26========

6. Conclusions 
In a nutshell, the main point of this paper is that, after the Golden Age, Italy experienced  increasing difficulties in adjusting its economy to the changing external context and to the  requirements for sustaining catch-up growth at a higher level of economic development. The  adjustment issue is common to advanced countries but the difficulties experienced in Italy  look particularly severe. The point is both that Italy had a greater need for reform after the  success of the early postwar period and that  Italy  had more problems in making effective  reforms. 
In  the  Golden  Age  it  was  different.  The  Italian  performance  in  terms  of  growth  and  productivity  was  spectacular  even  taking  account  of  the  catching  up  effect.  The  postwar  settlement was heavily conditioned by the external policy environment but the main policy  choices were not disrupted by the harsh conflicts, reflecting somehow the sense of national  responsibility of the political and economical leadership emerging from the war. The wage  moderation determined by the unlimited labour supply in the agricultural sector, the features  of  human  capital  particularly  suited  to  the  existing  technologies,  the  impulse  to  industrialization given directly and indirectly by the large state owned firms, the effective  allocation of resources provided by the banks controlled by the State, the capacity of private  entrepreneurs  in  enhancing  their  performance  especially  in  the  traditional  sectors,  the  liberalization of trade and participation in the Common Market were all growth-promoting  factors. 
At  the  beginning  of  the  1960s,  after  the  “economic  miracle”,  this  model  was  put  under  pressure and attempts to correct the destabilizing forces generated by the model itself failed.  The wage and the oil shock around 1970 on the one hand and the decline of Fordism on the  other engendered everywhere in Europe – albeit in different forms and at varying speeds – macro and micro adjustment processes. Italy changed relatively little. Having arrived near to  the technology frontier, the economy proved too slow to adjust to the new context, in spite of  the  success  in  mitigating  inflexibilities  by  developing  a  regionalized  model  of  capitalism  based on small and medium firms. 
Cushioned by inflation and devaluation, growth remained relatively high in the 1970s. In the  subsequent  decade,  in  spite  of  improved  conditions  for  addressing  macroeconomic  disequilibria  (the  long  expansionary  cycle  of  the  major  economies,  the  end  of  the  “wage  push  era”,  the  deceleration  of  inflation,  the  new  monetary  policy  after  joining  the  EMS)  structural  adjustments    were  neglected,  in  particular  with  regard  to  fiscal  discipline  and  competition policies in sheltered sectors. The catching up of the South came to a halt. 
Major supply side reforms were eventually implemented in the aftermath of the 1992 crisis  and also in connection with the policies undertaken in the EU. Nevertheless, in the second  half of the decade growth fell below the EU average. These reforms were an important step  in  the  right  direction  but  ultimately  fell  short  of  what  was  required.  While  increasing  the  
27 

========27========

pressure  for  adjustments  through  price  and  exchange-rate  stability  and  more  stringent  constraints on fiscal policy – participation in EMU did not help as far as the improvement of  growth prospects was concerned. Clearly, this has made  Italy‟s position in terms of fiscal  sustainability weaker and has therefore made the country more vulnerable in the crisis which  has erupted since 2007. 
Why did policy reform prove unable to stimulate growth? More specifically, what were the  major difficulties in implementing sufficient structural adjustments after the Golden Age, in  spite of the growing awareness of their necessity? These are the crucial questions we must  try to answer. We can tentatively list a number of not unrelated reasons. 
The first refers to a long standing feature of Italian society, i.e., the existence and severity,  except for very limited periods, of conflicts between opposing groups and parties. In part,  but by no means only, these were connected to the big ideological divide between the strong  communist-oriented opposition and the ruling parties. Reforms in the history of the country  are  rare;  much  more  commons  are  periods  of  violent  conflicts  or  of  policy  stalemates  because of the veto power of the opposing actors. In the 1970s, this feature stands out most  clearly  and  made  reform  almost  impossible.  In  the  1980s,  the  „divided  society‟  started  to  take other forms, less based on (declining) ideologies and more on the gradual proliferation  of many consolidated interest groups, each one seeking to gain rents at the expense of others.  This basically explains the inadequacy of the adjustment in public finances.  
After the fall of the Berlin Wall – we come here to the second possible reason – the demise  of the two main parties, the Communists and the Christian Democrats, worsened the picture.  It may seem paradoxical in the light of the end of the ideological divide, but these two forces  were somehow able, each one within its area of influence, to represent the different interests  of  their  constituencies  in  a  policy  vision  which  reached  beyond  them  and  looked  at  the  perspectives  of  the  country  as  a  whole.  Their  disappearance  strengthened  instead  the  emergence of distributional coalitions at the expense of encompassing organizations (Olson,  1982) and stabilization (Alesina and Drazen 1991). 
The  third  reason  concerns  firms.  Their  capability  to  exploit  favourable  conditions  varied  through time. They were able to do so during the Golden Age thanks to the low wages and to  the  opening  of  the  economy  to  external  competition.  In  the  1970s,  they  overcame  the  emergency because of devaluation and generous fiscal policy; at the end of the decade large  firms  were  able  to  renew  the  capital  stock  while  small  firms  reacted  by  developing  an  original  locally-based  model.  Later,  however,  when  the  technological  context  started  to  change  and  required  more  product  innovations,  more  ICT  investments  and  corresponding  changes  in  the  organization  of  the  production  process,  Italian  firms  got  into  increasing  difficulties  which  still  continue.  The  difficulty  of  achieving  efficient  allocations  of  entrepreneurial resources resulting from closed corporate governance structures centred on  family-controlled and pyramidal groups proved to be a major competitive handicap in this  
28 

========28========

context.  The  gradual  elimination  of  the  exchange  rate  lever  in  the  face  of  mounting  competition from the emerging markets and the increased stringency of fiscal policy could  not  be  overcome.  One  can,  of  course,  argue  about  the  relative  importance  of  firm  endogenous  and  contextual  factors  but  there  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  there  is  a  historically-rooted  weakness  of  large  private  firms  in  Italy  compared  with  other  major  European countries. The importance of state-owned enterprises (born from the ashes of the  large industrial and financial private conglomerations) between the 1930s and the 1990s – a  unique  case  in  Western  Europe – indirectly  reflects  this  fact.  In  any  case,  whatever  the  historical reasons, this implies a greater need for supply-side policy reform compared with  elsewhere.  
The fourth reason is related to this conclusion. There might be a structural problem in the  implementation of change because of a lack of political leadership in reforming the Public  Administration to increase its effectiveness. The importance of and the reasons for this have  been widely debated during the whole history of united Italy and invests all the domains of  economic policy. We conjecture that this weakness is related to the increasing influence of  interest  groups  which invade both the Public Administration and the polity.  In any  event,  since the quality of institutions and public services are important for growth, especially in  the context of coping with globalization, lagging behind on this front entails serious risks.  
The disappointing performance of the South in the last thirty years shows this very clearly  because it is in these regions that these lags are mostly concentrated. The funds employed  were remarkable, comparable with those of the golden years of special development policy.  However  the  new  policy  failed  to  meet  its  ambitious  objectives  mainly  because  of  the  inadequacy  of  national  policies,  whose  target  is  the  whole  national  territory  rather  than  regional policy per se (Cannari, Magnani and Pellegrini 2010). Education, justice, security  are  growth  and  productivity  promoting  factors.  Their  weakness  explains  much  of  the  unsatisfactory performance of the Italian economy. The Doing Business indicators reported  in Table 15, which are strictly related to the quality of public services and administration, are  in the South even weaker than in the rest of Italy, and far below the average of European  countries. The factors hindering growth of the Southern economy in the last twenty years are  of the same nature of those which curb the Italian economy as whole. In the South they are,  however, more powerful. In this sense, the Southern question is today more than ever the  magnifying mirror of Italy‟s difficulties.  
The  poor  quality  of  public  services  brings  us  to  the  final  point,  i.e.  the  changes  in  the  political  institutional  design  so  as  to  increase  the  possibility  of  taking  substantial  policy  decisions.  The  theme  has  quite  a tradition  in  the  political  economy  literature.  The  issue  concerns the relationship between political institutions and the functioning of the economy.  In particular, it has been often argued that the electoral rule is an important factor for the  economic performance of a country (Persson and Tabellini 2005). In Italy, the crisis of 1992  marked  the  end  of  the  so  called  First  Republic.  Widespread  criticism  was  addressed  in  
29 

========29========

particular  to  the  strictly  proportional  electoral  law  for  its  alleged  feature  of  producing  a  plethora  of  parties,  thus  often  not  allowing  the  government  to  rule  with  the  necessary  stability because of the power of even small players and the resulting tendency to look for  compromises  and  even  to  change  majorities  in  order  to  survive.  The  principle  of  “alternation” was invoked, so that clear policy options could be implemented by the winning  coalitions during their mandate. A majority rule was introduced in 1993; it remained in force  till  2005,  when  it  was  replaced  by  an  adjusted  proportional  system.  The  results  of  the  majority  rule  in  terms  of  stability  of  the  governments  and  the  number  of  parties  were,  however, not encouraging (Bordignon and Monticini 2011). This suggests that easy solutions  in terms of institutional engineering do not exist as far as the structure of the political system  and,  a  fortiori,  as  far  as  the  capacity  to  implement  structural  economic  reforms  are  concerned. 
               
      
            
30 

========30========

Table 1. Trade Costs: Italy with various partner countries 
1929 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 
Germany 
1.10 
1.27 
1.01 
0.79 
0.61 
0.56 
0.66 
UK 1.22 1.36 1.25 1.21 0.86 0.84 0.90 
Spain 1.63 2.40 1.54 1.42 1.08 0.87 0.87 
USA 1.26 1.40 1.29 1.22 1.13 1.13 1.14 
India 1.54 1.97 2.00 2.30 1.86 1.85 1.83 
Notes: trade costs are inferred from a gravity model of trade flows and comprise both policy  and non-policy barriers to trade; world average trade costs normalized to 1950 = 100 were  98 in 1970, 82 in 1980 and 84 in 2000. 
Source: data underlying Jacks et al. (2011) generously provided by Dennis Novy 
31 

========31========

Table 2. Capital Account Openness and Foreign-Owned Assets/World GDP (per cent) 
a) Capital Account Openness 
World  Average 99.7 
Italy 
1890-1913 
1949 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000-5 
42 53 55 47 50 68 78 
1950/4 1955/9 1960/4 1965/9 1970/4 1975/9 1980/4 1985/9 1990/4 1995/9 
37.5 50 67.5 75 75 75 75 85 92.5 100 
b) Foreign-Owned Assets/World GDP 
1870 1914 1945 1960 1980 2000 
   7 18    5    6 25 92 
Sources:  capital account openness from Quinn (2003) and data appendix to Quinn and  Toyoda (2008); foreign-owned assets/world GDP from Obstfeld and Taylor (2004). 
32 

========32========

Table 3. Shares of World Output and World Exports of Manufactures (per cent) 
a) Output 
Western Europe North America Japan China India Other Asia Rest of World 
1953 26.1 46.9    2.9    2.3    1.7    1.0 19.1 
b) Exports 
Western Europe North America Japan China Rest of Asia Rest of World 
1953 51.9 35.8    2.9    0.1    1.6    7.7 
1973 24.5 35.1    8.8    3.9    2.1    3.1 22.5 
1990 32.9 23.4 16.8    2.7    1.5    4.9 17.8 
2007 22.4 25.7 16.5 11.2    1.6    8.6 14.0 
1973 55.9 16.1    9.6    0.6    4.5 13.3 
1990 54.2 15.2 11.5    1.9 11.1    6.1 
2007 40.8 11.9    6.7 11.9 16.5    8.3 
Sources: output from Bairoch (1982), United Nations (1965) and UNIDO (2002) (2009);  exports from United Nations (1958) (1976) and WTO (2001) (2008) 
33 

========33========

Table 4. Real GDP Measured at Purchasing Power Parity  
a) Levels and Growth Rates of Real GDP/Person 
1950 
($GK 1990) 
Western Europe USA Japan China India Asian Tigers World Average 
4569 9561 1921    448    619    955 2111 
1973 ($GK 1990) 
2007 ($GK  1990) 
11392 16689 11434 
     838 
     853    3631    4083 
21589 31357 22950    6303    2817 21212    7468 
Growth  Rate, 1950- 
73 (per cent 
p.a.) 
4.05 
2.45 
8.07 
2.76 
1.41 
5.98 
2.91 
Growth  Rates, 1973- 
2007 (per cent 
p.a.) 
1.91 
1.88 
2.07 
6.12 
3.57 
5.34 
1.80 
b) Shares of World GDP (per cent) 
Western Europe North America Japan China India Other Asia Rest of World 
1950 26.2 29.2    3.0    4.5    4.2    4.8 28.1 
1973 25.6 24.0    7.8    4.6    3.1    5.2 29.7 
1990 22.2 23.3    8.6    7.8    4.0    8.0 26.1 
2007 17.5 20.8    5.9 16.8    6.4 10.2 22.4 
Source:  Maddison (2003) with updates from website. 
34 

========34========

Table 5. Levels and Rates of Growth of Real GDP/Person in Western European  Countries, 1950-73 
($1990GK and per cent per year) 
Y/P 1950 
Y/P 1973 
Switzerland Denmark UK Sweden Netherlands Belgium Norway France West Germany Finland Austria Italy Ireland Spain Portugal Greece 
9064 6943 6939 6739 5971 5462 5430 5186 4281 4253 3706 3502 3453 2189 2086 1915 
18204 13945 12025 12494 13081 12170 11324 12824 13153 11085 11235 10634    6867    7661    7063    7655 
Growth Rate,  
1950-73 
3.08 
3.08 
2.42 
3.06 
3.45 
3.54 
3.24 
4.02 
5.02 
4.25 
4.94 
4.95 
3.03 
5.60 
5.45 
6.21 
Source: The Conference Board (2011) 
35 

========35========

Table 6. Contribution of Structural Change to Labour Productivity Growth, 1950-73  (per cent per year) 
Denmark France Italy Netherlands Spain Sweden UK West Germany 
Orthodox Measure 0.24 
0.00 
0.83 
-0.31 
0.80 
0.00 
-0.12 
0.18 
Broadberry Measure 1.10 
0.52 
1.77 
0.29 
1.77 
0.60 
0.31 
0.77 
Note: the orthodox approach considers that the contribution of structural change equals  ΔAO/AO – ΣΔAi/Ai*Ai/AO*Si where A is labour productivity, S is share of employment and  the subscripts O and i stand for the whole economy and sector i, respectively (Nordhaus,  1972). Broadberry (1998) modified this so that labour productivity growth in declining  sectors is measured using the overall rate of labour force growth not the sectoral rate. 
Source: derived from van Ark (1996) based on a three-sector decomposition (agriculture,  industry, services) where agriculture is deemed to be the declining sector. 
36 

========36========

Table 7. Levels and Rates of Growth of Real GDP per Person and per Hour Worked,  1973-1995 ($GK1990 and per cent per year) 
a) Real GDP/Person 
Y/P 1973 
Y/P 1995 
Switzerland 18204 Denmark 13945 Sweden 13494 West Germany 13153 Netherlands 13081 France 12824 Belgium 12170 UK 12025 Norway 11324 Austria 11235 Finland 11085 Italy 10634 Spain    7661 Greece    7655 Portugal    7063 Ireland    6867 
b) Real GDP/Hour Worked 
20627 20350 17648 19849 18700 18206 18270 17586 21578 17959 15970 17216 13132 10321 11614 12734 
Growth Rate,  
1973-95 
0.58 
1.74 
1.23 
1.92 
1.65 
1.61 
1.87 
1.75 
2.96 
2.16 
1.88 
2.21 
2.48 
1.37 
2.29 
2.85 
Y/HW  Y/HW 1995 
1973 
Sweden 18.01 23.13 Switzerland 17.86 21.92 Belgium 17.42 30.37 Netherlands 17.32 27.75 West Germany 16.05 30.83 Denmark 15.88 26.98 France 15.63 29.02 Norway 15.06 29.82 Italy 14.58 24.29 UK 13.37 24.33 Austria 13.20 23.50 Finland 11.60 22.36 Spain    9.92 22.21 Portugal    9.33 13.60 Ireland    8.18 17.21 Greece    8.07 11.63 Note: estimates for Ireland are based on GNP 
Growth Rate,  
1973-95 
1.15 
0.95 
2.56 
2.17 
3.01 
2.44 
2.85 
3.15 
2.35 
2.76 
2.66 
3.03 
3.72 
1.74 
3.43 
1.68 
Source: The Conference Board (2011) 
37 

========37========

Table 8. Employment Protection (0-4) 
Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK 
USA 
1960 1.10 1.38 1.90 2.30 0.75 0.80 
1980 1.92 3.21 2.30 2.30 2.80 3.21 
0.00 3.45 2.70 2.91 
4.00 0.00 1.00 0.27 
0.90 3.60 2.70 2.91 4.00 3.87 3.50 1.00 0.60 
0.21 
0.21 
2000 2.21 2.18 1.50 2.09 2.98 2.34 3.50 0.93 2.51 2.12 2.56 3.67 2.93 2.24 1.14 0.68 
2008 1.93 2.18 1.50 1.96 3.05 2.12 2.73 1.11 1.89 1.95 2.69 3.15 2.98 1.87 1.14 0.75 
0.21 
0.21 
Sources: Nickell (2006) and OECD (2010) 
38 

========38========

Table 9. Product Market Regulation (0-6) and Price-Cost Margins 
Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK USA 
PCM Manufactures 
1.15 
1.10 
1.11 
1.18 
1.12 
1.13 
1.15 1.13 1.13 
1.14 1.11 
1.11 1.12 
PCM Services 1.28 1.20 1.25 1.27 1.26 1.25 
PMR 1975 5.2 5.5 5.5 5.5 6.0 5.2 5.7 5.7 5.8 5.6 5.5 5.9 5.1 4.5 4.1 4.8 3.7 
PMR 1990 
1.38 1.24 1.26 
1.17 
1.16 1.19 
4.5 5.3 4.7 4.6 5.2 4.6 5.7 5.0 5.8 5.6 4.5 5.3 4.7 4.4 4.2 3.0 2.3 
PMR 1998 2.33 2.17 1.59 2.08 2.52 2.06 2.99 1.65 2.59 1.66 1.85 2.25 2.55 1.93 2.48 1.07 1.28 
PMR 2008 1.45 1.43 1.06 1.19 1.45 1.33 2.37 0.92 1.38 0.97 1.16 1.43 1.03 1.30 1.18 0.84 0.84 
Sources: PMR indicator for 1975 and 1990 from Conway and Nicoletti (2006) and for 1998  and 2008 from Wolfl et al. (2009); the 1975 and 1990 numbers are not comparable with  those for the later years.  Price-cost margins from Hoj et al. (2007) refer to the mid-1990s.  
39 

========39========

Table 10. Distortionary Tax Revenues and Social Transfers (%GDP) 
a) Distortionary Tax Revenues 
1965 Austria 21.2 Belgium 19.5 Denmark 17.8 Finland 17.3 France 21.3 Germany 21.2 Greece 10.0 Ireland 11.8 Italy 15.4 Netherlands 22.4 Norway 17.4 Portugal    8.8 Spain    8.7 Sweden 24.1 Switzerland 11.5 UK 20.3 USA 19.1 
b) Social Transfers 
1980 26.7 30.0 27.0 23.2 30.0 27.3 13.9 18.0 21.8 31.3 27.5 12.6 17.9 35.7 19.5 24.9 21.7 
1995 29.6 32.4 33.1 31.8 31.2 26.8 18.6 19.6 29.2 31.3 25.2 19.2 22.9 34.8 21.7 22.7 22.9 
2007 30.1 32.3 32.5 29.9 31.2 25.3 20.6 22.2 30.0 26.2 31.4 21.8 27.4 34.6 22.3 25.5 23.2 
1960 1980 1995 2007 
Austria 15.9 22.6 26.6 26.4 
Belgium 13.1 23.5 26.4 26.5 
Denmark 12.3 25.2 28.9 26.1 
Finland    8.8 18.4 27.4 24.6 
France 13.4 20.8 28.3 28.4 
Germany 18.1 23.0 26.6 25.2 
Greece 10.4 11.5 19.3 21.3 
Ireland    8.7 17.4 18.4 18.5 
Italy 13.1 18.0 19.8 24.9 
Netherlands 11.7 24.1 22.8 20.1 
Norway    7.8 16.9 23.5 20.8 
Portugal 10.8 18.1 22.5 
Spain 15.5 21.5 21.6 
Sweden 10.8 28.6 32.5 27.3 
Switzerland    4.9 13.9 17.5 18.5 
UK 10.2 16.6 20.4 20.5 
USA    7.3 13.3 15.4 16.2 
Note: distortionary taxes as defined in Kneller et al. (1999) and refer to direct taxes; Ireland  in 1995 and 2007 as %GNP. 
Sources: Lindert (2004), OECD (2010b) (2011) 
40 

========40========

Table 11. Levels and Rates of Growth of Real GDP per Person and per Hour Worked,  1995-2007 ($GK1990 and per cent per year) 
a) Real GDP per Person 
Norway Switzerland Denmark Netherlands Belgium France Austria Germany Sweden UK Italy Finland Spain Ireland Portugal Greece 
Y/P, 1995 21578 20627 20350 18700 18270 18206 17959 17672 17648 17586 17216 15970 13132 12734 11614 10321 
Y/P, 2007 28553 24781 25060 24405 23487 22282 23744 21143 25381 23620 20163 24635 17869 23338 14601 15860 
Growth  Rate, 19952.36 - 
20071.55 
1.76 
2.24 
2.12 
1.70 
2.36 
1.51 
3.07 
2.49 
1.33 
3.67 
2.60 
5.18 
1.93 
3.64 
b) Real GDP per Hour Worked 
Y/HW,  Belgium 
199530.37 Norway 29.82 France 29.02 Netherlands 27.75 Denmark 26.98 Germany 25.10 UK 24.33 Italy 24.29 Austria 23.50 Sweden 23.13 Finland 22.36 Spain 22.21 Switzerland 21.92 Ireland 17.21 Portugal 13.60 Greece 11.63 Note: Ireland is GNP 
Y/HW,  200735.74 
36.72 
35.44 
33.84 
30.52 
30.78 
31.65 
25.63 
28.68 
31.32 
30.42 
23.43 
25.82 
26.01 
15.62 
16.78 
Growth  Rate,1.37 19951.69-2007 
1.69 
1.67 
1.03 
1.72 
2.22 
0.46 
1.68 
2.56 
2.60 
0.64 
1.38 
3.50 
1.16 
3.10 
Source: The Conference Board (2011) 
41 

========41========

Table 12. Investment in Intangibles in the Market Sector, 2006 (%GDP) 
Austria Czech Republic Denmark France Germany Greece Italy Slovakia Spain UK USA 
Computerized  InformationInformation 
0.89 
0.71 
1.87 
1.42 
0.73 
0.34 
0.64 
0.37 
0.79 
1.55 
1.61 
Innovative  PropertyProperty 
3.14 
2.80 
3.06 
3.18 
3.59 
0.62 
2.21 
1.76 
2.78 
3.16 
4.37 
Economic  CompetenciesCompetencies 
2.42 
2.93 
2.93 
3.30 
2.84 
0.63 
2.19 
2.39 
1.90 
5.84 
5.50 
Total 
6.46 6.45 7.86 7.90 7.16 1.59 5.04 4.53 5.47 10.54 11.48 
Source: van Ark et al. (2009) 
42 

========42========

Table 13. Market Sector Growth Accounting with Intangibles, 1995-2006 (% per year) 
ICT K/L 
Austria Czech R Denmark France Germany Greece Italy Slovakia Spain UK USA 
0.26 0.35 0.44 0.12 0.20 0.45 0.11 
0.19 0.63 0.40 
Non-ICT  Intangible  
K/LK/L 
-0.02 
1.62 
0.24 
0.31 
0.48 
1.48 
0.29 
2.72 
0.49 
0.28 
0.24 
K/LK/L 0.55 0.68 0.72 0.48 0.38 0.24 0.12 0.21 0.12 0.69 0.83 
Labour Quality 0.22 0.31 0.17 0.40 -0.15 0.71 0.22 0.46 0.64 0.22 0.18 
TFP 
1.35 1.64 0.53 0.69 0.88 0.40 -0.45 2.78 -0.96 1.23 1.33 
Labour  ProductivityProductivity  Growth4.60 
2.36 
2.11 
2.00 
1.79 
3.27 
0.29 
6.17 
0.47 
3.06 
2.96 
Note: intangibles investments are part of final output and ICT K included with non-ICT K in  
Slovakia 
Source: van Ark et al. (2009) 
43 

========43========

Table 14. Governance Indicators (-2.5 to 2.5) 
a) 1996 
Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK 
b) 2007 
Government  EffectivenessEffectiveness  
1.984 
1.935 
2.027 
2.114 
1.755 
2.006 
0.836 
1.732 
0.919 
2.056 
2.064 
0.999 
1.570 
2.010 
2.146 
1.884 
Regulatory  QualityQuality 
1.154 
0.971 
1.213 
1.089 
0.766 
1.072 
0.746 
1.224 
0.649 
1.285 
1.063 
1.028 
0.878 
1.075 
1.082 
1.469 
Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK 
Government  EffectivenessEffectiveness 
1.776 
1.502 
2.235 
1.907 
1.433 
1.606 
0.661 
1.614 
0.333 
1.708 
1.978 
0.902 
0.960 
1.942 
1.966 
1.622 
Regulatory  QualityQuality 
1.649 
1.365 
1.855 
1.511 
1.255 
1.549 
0.850 
1.780 
0.869 
1.735 
1.331 
1.084 
1.186 
1.569 
1.620 
1.801 
Control of CorruptionCorruption 
2.120 
1.350 
2.222 
2.221 
1.353 
2.134 
0.511 
1.486 
0.505 
2.178 
2.216 
2.015 
1.248 
2.203 
2.166 
2.171 
Rule of Law 
1.841 1.406 1.828 1.914 1.520 1.633 1.098 1.589 1.050 1.734 1.928 1.276 1.354 1.763 1.946 1.662 
Control of  CorruptionCorruption 
2.049 
1.303 
2.426 
2.408 
1.433 
1.698 
0.319 
1.727 
0.270 
2.159 
1.925 
0.990 
1.008 
2.206 
2.134 
1.716 
Rule of Law 
1.928 1.297 1.964 1.861 1.378 1.698 0.798 1.735 0.403 1.738 1.905 1.007 1.083 1.855 1.816 1.658 
Note: indicators are normalized such that the median = 0 in each year and so are not strictly  
comparable over time 
Source: World Bank. Governance matters indicators 
44 

========44========

Table 15. Doing Business Indicators: Time needed to complete procedures  
Starting a  Business 
Country 
Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Ireland Italy (Rome) Netherlands Norway Portugal Spain Sweden Switzerland UK 
DB 2008 (1) 
Dealing  
with  
Licenses 
Registering  Enforcing  Property 
Time  (days) 
Time  (days) 
28 4 6 14 7 18 38 13 13 8 7 7 47 15 20 13 
194 169 69 66 137 100 169 209 257 230 252 327 233 116 154 144 
Contracts 
Time  (days) 
Time  (days) 
32 132 42 14 123 40 22 38 27 7 3 42 18 15 16 21 
397 505 380 235 331 394 819 515 1210 514 310 577 515 508 417 404 
Starting a  Business 
Area  
Italy NW Italy NE Italy Centre Italy South &  Islands 
DB Italy (2008) (2) 
Dealing  
with  
Licenses 
Registering  Enforcing  Property 
Time  (days) 
Time  (days) 
13,2 13,3 12,1 25,3 
414,8 442,3 355,5 585,0 
45 
Contracts 
Time  (days) 
Time  (days) 
10,6 10,4 11,2 12,2 
1826 1866 2095 2140 

========45========

(1) Source : World Bank Doing Business ( (2) Source: Bianco, e Bripi, F., “Administrative  Burdens on Business Activities: Regional Disparities”, Giornale degli Economisti, Vo. 69,  num. 2 (Luglio 2010) pp. 37-79.Weighted averages of regional values in the area  (using   regional GDP    as weights) 
46 

========46========

Fig.1  
Source: Balassone, Francese and Pace (2010) 
47 

========47========

Fig.2 
Source: Banca d‟Italia (2000) 
48 

========48========

References 
Abramovitz, M. (1986), “Catching-Up, Forging Ahead, and Falling Behind”, Journal of Economic History, 36, pp. 385-406. 
Aghion, P. and Howitt, P. (2006), “Appropriate Growth Theory: a Unifying Framework”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 4, pp. 269-314. 
Alesina, A. and Drazen, A. (1991), “Why Are Stabilizations Delayed?”, American Economic Review, 5, pp. 1170-1188. 
Andreatta, B. and d‟Adda, C. (1985), “Effetti reali o nominali della svalutazione? Una riflessione  sull‟esperienza italiana dopo il primo shock petrolifero”,  Politica economica, I, 1, aprile, pp. 37-51. 
Antonelli, C. and Barbiellini-Amidei, F. (2009), “Knowledge, Innovation and Localized  Technological Change in Italy, 1950-1990”, Department of Economics Working Paper No. 13/09,  Università di Torino. 
Asso, P.F., Biagioli A. and Picozza, C. (1995),  “Ordinamento valutario, politica del cambio e  gestione delle riserve (1945-1960)” , in Banca d‟Italia, Collana storica, Stabilità e sviluppo negli anni  cinquanta, problemi strutturali e politiche economiche,  Bari: Laterza.  
Badinger, H. (2005), “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member  States”, Review of World Economics, 141, pp. 50-78. 
Bairoch, P. (1982), “International Industrialization Levels from 1750 to 1980”, Journal of European Economic History, 11, pp. 269-331. 
Balassone, F., Francese, M., Pace, A. (2010), “Public Debt and Growth in Italy” , paper presented to  the workshop “Italy‟s International Position, 1861-2011”,Perugia. 
Baldwin, R. (2006), “Multilateralising Regionalism: Spaghetti Bowls as Building Blocks on the Path  to Global Free Trade”, The World Economy, 29, pp. 1451-1518. 
Banca d‟Italia (2000), Annual report. 
Banca d‟Italia (1975), Annual Report for 1974, Governors concluding remarks. 
Barba Navaretti, G., Bugamelli, M, Schivardi, F., Altomonte, C., Horgos, D. and Maggioni. D.,  (2011), The global operations of Europeans Firms; the second EGIFE Policy Report, Brussels:  Bruegel.  
Barca, F., Iwai, K., Pagano, U. and Trento, S. (1998), “Postwar Institutional Reform: the Divergence  of Italian and Japanese Corporate Governance Models”, Dipartimento di Economia Politica,  Universita degli Studi di Siena Working Paper No. 234. 
Barca, F. (1997a) , “Compromesso senza riforme”, in Barca (1997b)  
Barca, F. (1997b) (ed), Storia del capitalismo italiano dal dopoguerra a oggi, Roma: Donzelli. 
Barca,  F.  and  Magnani,  M.  (1989), L’industria  fra  capitale  e  lavoro,  piccole  e  grandi  imprese  dall’autunno caldo alla ristrutturazione, Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Barca, F. and Trento, S. (1997), “La Parabola delle Partecipazioni: una Missione Tradita”, In F.  Barca (ed.),  (1997)  
49 

========49========

Barca, F. and Visco I. (1993), “L‟economia italiana nella prospettiva europea: terziario protetto e  dinamica dei redditi nominali” in: Micossi S., Visco I., (a cura di), Inflazione concorrenza e sviluppo,  Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Barone, G. and  Cingano, F. (2011), “Service Regulation and Growth: evidence from OECD  countries”, Economic Journal, forthcoming.. 
Barucci, E. and Pierobon, F. (2007), “Privatizations in Italy: Planning or Improvization?  Efficiency  Gains or Rents?”, Review of Economic Conditions in Italy, 61, pp. 341-369. 
Bennett, H. et al. (2008), “Competitiveness in the Southern Euro Area: France, Greece, Italy,  Portugal, and Spain”, IMF Working Paper No. 08/112. 
Bertola, G., Sestito. P. (2011) “A Comparative Perspective on Italy‟s Human Capital Accumulation”,  paper presented to the conference “Italy and the World Economy” 1861-2011”, Rome. 
Biagioli, A., (1995),” La posizione finanziaria dell‟Italia verso l‟estero dal 1945 al 1994: una  ricostruzione”, in  Ufficio Italiano Cambi, Studi per il Cinquantenario, Bari: Laterza. 
Bianchi, M. and Bianco, M. (2006), “Italian Corporate Governance in the Last 15 Years: from  Pyramids to Coalitions?”, ECGI Finance Working Paper No. 144. 
Bianchi, P. (2002), La rincorsa frenata: l’industria italiana dall’unita nazionale all’unificazione  europea. Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Bianco, M., and Bripi, F. (2010), “Administrative Burdens on Business Activities: Regional  Disparities”, mimeo Banca d‟Italia. 
Bianco, M. Giacomelli, S., Giorgiantonio, C.,  Palumbo, G.,  and Szego, B., (2008) “La durata  (eccessiva) dei procedimenti civili in Italia”, Rivista di Politica Economica.  
Bianco, M., Giacomelli, S. and Rodano, G. (2011), “Concorrenza e regolamentazione in Italia”,  paper presented at the workshop “Europa 2020: quali riforme strutturali per l‟Italia ?”  Banca d‟Italia,  aprile 2011. 
Bloom, N. and van Reenen, J. (2008), “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices in Italy”,  Rivista di Politica Economica, 15-56. 
Boarini, R. (2007), “Towards Better Schools and More Equal Opportunities for Learning in Italy”,  OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 727. 
Boltho, A. (1996), “Convergence, Competitiveness and the Exchange Rate”, in N. Crafts and G.  Toniolo (eds.), Economic Growth in Europe since 1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University  Press,107-130. 
Boltho,  A.  (1986),  “L‟economia  italiana  a  confronto:  1973-1985”,  in  Ente  per  gli  studi  monetari,  bancari e finanziari Luigi Einaudi, Oltre la crisi. Le prospettive di sviluppo dell’economia italiana e  il contributo del sistema finanziario, Bologna: Il Mulino, pp. 99-143. 
Bordignon,  M.  And  Monticini,  A.  (2011),  “The  Importance  of  the  Electoral  Rule:  Evidence  from  Italy”, CESifo Working Paper No. 3347. 
50 

========50========

Bordo, M. D. (1993), “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: an Historical  Overview”,in M. D. Bordo and B. Eichengreen (eds.), A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 3-108. 
Breinlich, H. and Tucci, A. (2010), “Foreign Market Conditions and Export Performance: Does  „Crowdedness‟ Reduce Exports?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7975. 
Broadberry, S. N. (1998), “How Did the United States and Germany Overtake Britain?: a Sectoral  Analysis of Comparative Productivity Levels, 1870-1990”, Journal of Economic History, 58, pp.  375-407. 
Broadberry, S. N., Giordano, C. and Zollino, F. (2010), “A Sectoral Analysis of Italy‟s Development,  1861-2011”, paper presented to the workshop “Italy‟s International Position, 1861-2011”, Perugia. 
Brusco, S. and Paba, S. (1997) “Per una storia dei distretti industriali italiani dal secondo dopoguerra  agli anni novanta”, in Barca ed (1997). 
Buccirossi, P., Ciari, L., Duso, T., Spagnolo, G. And Vitale, C. (2009), “Competition Policy and  Productivity Growth: an Empirical Assessment”, CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7470. 
Bugamelli, M. And Pagano, P. (2004), “Barriers to Investment in ICT”, Applied Economics, 36, pp.  2275-2286. 
Caballero,  R.,  Cowan,  K.,  Engel,  E.  and  Micco,  A.  (2004),  “Effective  Labor  Regulation  and  Microeconomic Flexibility”, NBER Working Paper No. 10744. 
Cannari, L. and Chiri, S. (2006) “La bilancia dei pagamenti di parte corrente Nord-Sud (1998-2000)”  in: Cannari, L. and Panetta, F. eds. Il sistema finanziario del Mezzogiorno; una visione d‟assieme,  Bari: Cacucci. 
Cannari, L., Magnani, M., and Pellegrini, G., (2010),  Critica della ragione meridionale: Il Sud e le  politiche pubbliche, Bari: Laterza. 
Cafiero, S. (1996), Questione meridionale e unità nazionale, Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Cameron, G. and Wallace, C. (2002), “Macroeconomic Performance in the Bretton Woods Era and  After”, Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 18, pp. 479‐494 
Carmignani, A. and Giacomelli, S., (2010), "Too many lawyers? Litigation in Italian Civil Courts”,  Banca d‟Italia, Working Paper No. 745. 
Carli, G. (1996), Cinquant'anni di vita italiana, Bari: Laterza. 
Casella, A. and Eichengreen, B. (1994), “Halting Inflation in Italy and France after the Second World  War”, in M. D. Bordo and F. Capie (eds.), Monetary Regimes in Transition. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press, pp. 312-345. 
Checherita, C. and Rother, P. (2010), “The Impact of High and Growing Government Debt on  Growth: an Empirical Investigation for the Euro Area”, ECB Working paper No. 1237. 
51 

========51========

Ciocca, P (2007), Ricchi per sempre? Una storia economica d’Italia (1796‐2005), Torino: Bollati  Boringhieri 
Comin, D., Hobijn, B. and Rovito, E. (2006), “Five Facts You Need to Know about Technology Diffusion”, NBER Working Paper No. 11928. 
Conway, P., de Rosa, D., Nicoletti, G. and Steiner, F. (2006), “Regulation, Competition and  Productivity Convergence”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 509. 
Conway, P. and Nicoletti, G. (2006), “Product Market Regulation in the Non-Manufacturing Sectors  of OECD Countries: Measurement and Highlights”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper  No. 530. 
Crafts, N., (2007), “Recent European Economic Growth: Why Can't It Be Like the Golden Age?",  National Institute Economic Review, 199, pp. 69-81. 
Crafts, N. and Toniolo, G. (2008), “European Economic Growth, 1990-2005: an Overview”, CEPR  Discussion Paper No. 6863. 
Daveri, F., Lecat, R. and Parisi, M. L. (2010), “Service De-regulation, Competition and the  Performance of French and Italian Firms”, mimeo, Banque de France. 
De Benedictis, L., (2005), “Three Decades of Italian Comparative Advantages”, The World  Economy, 29.11, pp. 1679-1709. 
De Cecco, M. and Ferri, G. (2001), “Italy‟s Financial System: Banks and Industrial Investment”, in  A. Boltho, A. Verselli and H. Yoshikawa (eds.), Comparing Economic Systems: Italy and Japan.  Basingstoke: Palgrave, pp. 64-84. 
De Nardis, S. and Trau, F. (2005), Il Modello che non c’era: l’Italia e la Divisione Internazionale del    Lavoro Industriale. Catanzaro: Rubbettino. 
Del Boca, D., Pasqua, S. and Pronzato, C. (2004), “Why are Fertility and Women‟s Employment  Rates so Low in Italy?  Lessons from France and the UK”, IZA Discussion Paper No. 1274. 
Del Monte, A., Giannola, A. (1978),  Il Mezzogiorno nell’economia italiana,  Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Dew-Becker, I. and Gordon, R. J. (2008), “The Role of Labor-Market Changes in the Slowdown of  European Productivity Growth”, NBER Working Paper No. 13840. 
Di Nino, V., Eichengreen, B. and Sbracia, M. (2010), “Real Exchange Rates, Trade and Growth:  Italy, 1861-2011”, paper presented to the workshop “Italy‟s International Economic Position, 1861 - 2011”, Perugia. 
Duval, R. (2003), “Retirement Behaviour in OECD Countries: the Impact of Old-Age Pension  Schemes and other Social Transfer Programmes”, OECD Economic Studies, 37, pp. 7-50. 
Eichengreen, B. (1996), “Institutions and Economic Growth: Europe after World War II”, in N.  Crafts and G. Toniolo (eds).,  Economic Growth in Europe since 1945. Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press,  pp. 38-72. 
Eichengreen, B., (2000), “The EMS Crisis in Retrospect”, NBER Working Paper No. 8035. 
52 

========52========

Eichengreen, B. and Uzan, M. (1992), “The Marshall Plan: Economic Effects and Implications for  Eastern Europe and the Former USSR”, Economic Policy, 7, pp. 13-75. 
Fabiani, S., Schivardi, F. and Trento, S. (2005), “ICT Adoption in Italian Manufacturing: Firm-Level  Evidence”, Industrial and Corporate Change, 14, pp. 225-249. 
Faggio, G. and Nickell, S. (2007), “Patterns of Work across the OECD”, Economic Journal, 117,  F416- F440. 
Fauri, F. (2010), “Il Piano Marshall e l‟Italia”, Bologna: Il Mulino. 
Federico, G. and Wolf. N. (2010), “Italy‟s Comparative Advantage: a Long-Run Perspective, 1860- 2010”, paper presented to the workshop “Italy‟s International Economic Position, 1861-2011”, Perugia. 
Giavazzi,  F.  and  Spaventa,  L.  (1989),  “Italy:  the  Real  Effects  of  Inflation  and  Disinflation”,  Economic Policy, 8, pp. 133-171. 
Gilmore, O. (2009), “Corporatism and Growth since 1945: Testing the Eichengreen Hypothesis”,  unpublished MSc dissertation, University of Warwick. 
Gordon, R. J. (2008), “Comparing Welfare in Europe and the United States”, In B. Eichengreen, M.  Landesmann and D. Stiefel (eds.), The European Economy in an American Mirror. Abingdon:  Routledge, pp. 15-40. 
Gressani,  D.,  Guiso,  L.  and  Visco,  I  (1987),  “Il  rientro  dell‟inflazione.  Un‟analisi  con  il  modello  econometrico della Banca d‟Italia” Contributi all’analisi economica del Servizio Studi, 3, pp. 125- 201. 
Gust, C. and Marquez, J. (2004), “International Comparisons of Productivity Growth: the Role of  Information technology and Regulatory Practices”, Labour Economics, 11, pp. 33-58.” 
Hall, P. A. and Soskice, D. (2001), “An Introduction to Varieties of Capitalism”, in P. A. Hall and D.  Soskice (eds.), Varieties of Capitalism. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 1-68. 
Hanushek, E. A. and Woessmann, L. (2009), “Do Better Schools Lead to More Growth: Cognitive  Skills, Economic Outcomes, and Causation”, NBER Working Paper No. 14633. 
Hoj, J., Jimenez, M., Maher, M., Nicoletti, G, and Wise, M. (2007), “Product Market Competition in  OECD Countries: Taking Stock and Moving Forward”, OECD Economics Department Working  Paper No. 575. 
Iuzzolino, G., Pellegrini, G., and Viesti, G. (2011), “Regional Convergence”, paper presented to the  conference “Italy and the World Economy” 1861-2011”, Rome. 
Klapper, L., Laeven, L. and Rajan, R. (2006), “Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship”,  Journal of Financial Economics, 82, pp. 591-629. 
Kneller, R., Bleaney, M. and Gemmell, N. (1999), “Fiscal Policy and Growth: Evidence from OECD  Countries”, Journal of Public Economics, 74, pp. 171‐190. 
Jacks, D.S., Meissner, C. M. and Novy, D. (2011), “Trade Booms, Trade Busts, and Trade Costs”,  Journal of International Economics, 83, pp. 185-201. 
53 

========53========

Johansson, A.,  Heady, C.,  Arnold, J., Brys B. and  Vartia, L. (2008) “Tax and Economic Growth”,  OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 620 . 
Kumar, M. S. and Woo, J. (2010), “Public Debt and Growth”, IMF Working Paper No. 10/174. 
Klepper, L., Laeven, L. and Rajan, R. (2006), “Entry Regulation as a Barrier to Entrepreneurship”,  Journal of Financial Economics, 82, pp. 591-629. 
La Malfa, U., Verso una politica di piano (1962), Napoli:  Edizioni scientifiche italiane. 
Lewis, W. A. (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour”, The Manchester School, 22, pp. 139-191. 
Lindert, P. H. (2004), Growing Public. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lissovolik, B. (2008), “Trends in Italy‟s Non-Price Competitiveness”, IMF Working Paper No.  08/124. 
Maddison, A. (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics. Paris: OECD. 
McGuckin, R., Spiegelman, M. and van Ark, B. (2005), The Retail Revolution. New York: The  Conference Board. 
Magnani, M. (1997a), “La ricchezza finanziaria delle famiglie e la bilancia dei pagamenti di parte  corrente Nord-Sud (1970-1992)”, Rivista economica del Mezzogiorno, XI, n.1. pp. 29-65. 
Magnani, M. (1997b) “Alla ricerca di regole nelle relazioni industriali: breve storia di due  fallimenti”, in Barca, F. (ed), (1997b) 
Milana, C. , Nascia, L. and Zeli, A. (2008), “Changes in Multifactor Productivity in Italy from 1998  to 2004: Evidence from Firm-Level Data using DEA”, EUKLEMS Project Working Paper No. 33. 
Morrisson, C. and Murtin, F. (2009), “The Century of Education”, Journal of Human Capital, 3, pp.  1-42. 
Nickell, W. (2006), The CEP-OECD Institutions Dataset, 1960-2004”, LSE Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 759. 
Nicoletti, G. and Scarpetta, S. (2005), “Regulation and Economic Performance: Product Market  Reforms and Productivity in the OECD”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 460. 
Nordhaus, W. D. (1972), “The Recent Productivity Slowdown”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 3, pp. 493-531. 
OECD (2010), Education at a Glance, Paris. 
Olson, M. (1982), The Rise and Decline of Nations. Yale: Yale University Press. 
Onofri,  P.  and  Basevi,  G.  (1997),  “Uno  sguardo  retrospettivo  alla  politica  economica  negli  anni  settanta” in Arcelli, M.(a cura di), Storia economia e società in Italia 1947-1997, Bari: Laterza. 
Pagano, P. and Schivardi, F. (2003), “Firm Size Distribution and Growth”, Scandinavian Journal of  Economics, 105, pp. 255-274. 
54 

========54========

Pagano, U. and Trento, S. (2003), Continuity and Change in Italian Corporate Governance: the  Institutional Stability of One Variety of Capitalism”, in M. di Matteo and P. Piacentini (eds.), The Italian Economy at the Dawn of the 21st Century. Ashgate, pp. 177-211. 
Persson T. and Tabellini, G., (2005), The Economic Effects of Constitutions, MIT Press. 
Pavitt, K. and Soete, L. (1982), “International Differences in Economic Growth and the International  Location of Innovation”, in H. Giersch (ed.), Emerging Technologies. Tubingen: Mohr, pp. 105-133. 
Persson, T. and Tabellini, G. (2005), The Economic Effects of Constitutions. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT  Press. 
Obstfeld, M. and Taylor, A. M. (2004), Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis and Growth.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
OECD (2010a), OECD Factbook. 
OECD (2010b), Revenue Statistics, 1965-2009. 
OECD (2011), Social Expenditure Database. 
Quinn, D. P. (2003), “Capital Account Liberalization and Financial Globalization, 1890-1999: a 
       Synoptic View”, International Journal of Finance and Economics, 8, pp. 189-204. 
Quinn, D. P. and Toyoda, A. M. (2008), “Does Capital Account Liberalization Lead to Economic  Growth?”, Review of Financial Studies, 21, pp. 1403-1449. 
Rae, D. and Sollie, M. (2007), “Globalisation and the European Union: Which Countries are Best  Placed to Cope?”, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No. 586. 
Rossi, N. and Toniolo, G. (1996), “Italy”, in N. Crafts and G. Toniolo (eds.), Economic Growth in Europe since 1945. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 427-454. 
Sabel, C.F. (1982), Work and Politics: the Division of Labour in Industry, Cambridge: Cambridge  University Press.  
Salvati, M. (2000), Occasioni mancate. Economia e politica in Italia dagli anni '60 a oggi, Bari:  Laterza 
Schivardi, F. and Viviano, E. (2011), “Entry Barriers in Retail Trade”, Economic Journal, 121, pp.  145-170. 
Spinelli, F. and Fratianni, M. (1991), Storia monetaria d’Italia. L’evoluzione del sistema monetario e  bancario, Milano: Mondadori.  
Staderini,  A.  and  Vadalà,  E.  (2009)  “Bilancio  pubblico  e  flusssi  redistributivi  interregionali”  in  :  Banca d‟Italia, Il Mezzogiornoe la politica economica dell’Italia. 
Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W. (2005), “Understanding Changes in International Business Cycle  Dynamics”, Journal of the European Economic Association, 3, pp. 968-1006. 
Tarantelli, E. (1981). “Se l‟inflazione non cala paghino le imprese”. La Repubblica, 8 April.  Reprinted in Tarantelli, E., (1995), La forza delle idee, Bari: Laterza. 
55 

========55========

Temin, P. (2002), “The Golden Age of European Growth Reconsidered”, European Review of Economic History, 6, pp. 3-22. 
The Conference Board (2011), Total Economy Database. 
Timmer, M. P., Inklaar, R., O‟Mahony, M. and van Ark, B. (2010), Economic Growth in Europe: a Comparative Industry Perspective,    Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Timmer, M. P. and van Ark, B. (2005), “Does Information and Communication Technology Drive  EU-US Productivity Differentials?”, Oxford Economic Papers, 57, pp. 693-716. 
Trigilia, C. and Burroni L. (2009), “Italy: Rise, Decline and Restructuring of a Regionalized  Capitalism”, Economy and Society, 38, pp. 630-653. 
United Nations (1958), Yearbook of International Trade Statistics,    New York. 
United Nations (1965), The Growth of World Industry, 1938-1961,    New York. 
United Nations (1976), Yearbook of International Trade Statistics,    New York. 
UNIDO (2002), International Yearbook of Industrial Statistics,    Wien. 
UNIDO (2009), International Yearbook of Industrial Statistics,    Wien. 
van Ark, B. (1996), “Sectoral Growth Accounting and Structural Change in Postwar Europe”, in van  Ark, B. and Crafts, N. (eds.), Quantitative Aspects of Post-War European Economic Growth.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 84-164. 
van Ark, B., Hao, J. X., Corrado, C. and Hulten, C. (2009), “Measuring Intangible Capital and its  Contribution to Economic Growth in Europe”, EIB Papers, 14(1), pp. 63-93. 
Verspagen, B. (1996), “Technology Indicators and Economic Growth in the European Area: Some  Empirical Evidence”, in B. van Ark and N. Crafts (eds.), Quantitative Aspects of Post-War European Economic Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 215-243. 
Wolfl, A., Wanner, I., Kozluk, T. and Nicoletti, G. (2009), “Ten Years of Product Market Reform in  OECD Countries: Insights from a Revised PMR Indicator”, OECD Economics Department Working  Paper No. 695. 
Woods, D. (1998), “The Crisis (Collapse) of Italy‟s Public Enterprise System: a Revised Property  Rights Perspective”, Journal of Modern Italian Studies, 3, pp. 22-41. 
Woessmann, L, Ludemann, E., Schutz, G. and West, M. R. (2007), “School Accountability,  Autonomy, Choice, and the Level of Student Achievement: International Evidence from PISA 2003”,  OECD Education Working Paper No. 13. 
WTO (2001), International Trade Statistics,    Geneva. 
WTO (2008), International Trade Statistics,    Geneva. 
56 

========56========

