November 2011 
No. 62 
A Sectoral Analysis of Italy's Development: 1861 -2010 
Stephen Broadberry(London School fo Economics and CAGE),  Claire Giordano(Banca d‘Italia) and Francesco Zollino(Banca d‘Italia) 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 
1 

========1========

A SECTORAL ANALYSIS  OF  ITALY’S DEVELOPMENT, 1861-2010 
Stephen Broadberry1, Claire Giordano 
2 
and  Francesco Zollino 
3 
Abstract 
Italy‘s economic growth over its 150 years of unified history did not occur at a steady pace nor was it  balanced across sectors. Relying on an entirely new input (labour and capital) database by us built and presented in the Appendix, together with new Banca d‘Italia estimates of GDP by sector, this  paper evaluates the different labour productivity growth trends within the Italian economy‘s sectors,  as well as the contribution of structural change to productivity growth. Italy‘s performance is then set  in  an  international  context:  a  comparison  of  sectoral  labour  productivity  growth  rates  and  levels  within  a  selected  sample  of  countries  (UK,  US,  Germany,  Japan,  India)  allows  us  to  better  time,  quantify and gauge the causes of Italy‘s catching-up process and subsequent more recent slowdown.  Finally, the paper analyses the proximate sources of Italy‘s growth, relative to the other countries, in  a standard growth accounting framework, in an attempt also to disentangle the contribution of both  total factor productivity growth and capital deepening to the country‘s labour productivity dynamics. 
JEL classifications: N10, N30, O47, O57 
Keywords:  Labour  productivity,  sectoral  disaggregation,  international  comparison,  growth  accounting 
This paper was presented at the Conference ―Italy and the World Economy, 1861-1911‖ Rome, Banca d‘Italia 12-15 October 2011 
                                                  
1 
London School of Economicsand CAGE. Email address: S.N.Broadberry@lse.ac.uk. 
2 
Banca d‘Italia, Structural Economic Analysis Department. Email address: claire.giordano@bancaditalia.it. 3 
Banca d‘Italia, Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Department. Email address: francesco.zollino@bancaditalia.it 
2 

========2========

Contents 
1. Introduction..................................................................................................................................................4 2. The Contours of Italian Economic Growth..................................................................................................5 
2.1 Italy’s Output and Labour Data .........................................................................................................6 
2.2 Labour productivity growth in Italy ...................................................................................................7 
2.3 Structural change in the Italian economy.........................................................................................10 
2.4 A first overview of Italy’s long-run growth ......................................................................................13 3. A Closer Look at Italy‘s Sectoral Performance..........................................................................................13 
3.1       The structure of employment and labour productivity growth............................................................14 
3.2 An overview of Italy’s industry and services labour productivity growth ........................................15 4. Italy‘s Productivity Performance in International Perspective...................................................................16 4.1       The structure of employment………………………………………………………………………….16 4.2       Labour productivity growth by sector………………………………………………………………...17 4.3       Comparative labour productivity levels…………………………………………................................18 4.4      An overview of Italian productivity performance in international perspective……………………….19 5.            Accounting for Italian Economic Growth.............................................................................................21 5.1       Methodology, sources and an analysis of Italy’s capital stock……………………………………….20 5.2       Aggregate TFP development in Italy……………………………………………................................22 5.3        TFP growth in an international perspective…………………………………....................................23 5.4       An overview of Italy’s TFP performance………………………………………..................................24 6.     Concluding Comments…………………………………………………………………………………….24 A.     Data Appendix…………………………………………………………………………………………….39 B.     Methodological Appendix…………………………………………………………………………………65 References………………………………………………………………………………….................................67 
3 

========3========

1. Introduction1 
At  the  time  of  its  unification  in  1861,  Italy  was  one  of  the  poorest  countries  in  western Europe, following a long period of decline which lasted from the late middle ages to  the  nineteenth  century (Malanima  2007). Whereas  the  centre  of  economic  gravity  within  Europe  in  1300  had  clearly  been  in  the  Mediterranean  region  and  particularly  in  the  city  states of north Italy, during the centuries after 1500, it had shifted northwards, first to the  Netherlands and by the nineteenth century to Great Britain, where the Industrial Revolution  ushered in the transition to modern economic growth (Kindleberger 1996). As the Industrial  Revolution spread to other parts of Europe and the New World, there was a danger that Italy  would fall further behind. 
This paper examines Italy‘s growth and productivity performance over the 150 year  period  since  1861, first  in  isolation,  and  then in  an  international  comparative  perspective.  Italy  is  compared  to  the  old  and  new  technological  leaders, the  U.S.  and  the  U.K.,  to  a  similar  ―late-unifier‖  such  as  Germany,  and  to  two  Asian  countries,  India  and  Japan.  The  study  makes  use  of  new  estimates  of  Italian  GDP  broken  down  into  ten  sectors,  so  as  to  capture the dynamics of structural change. New estimates of both labour and capital inputs  are  also  provided,  so  as  to  identify  the  proximate  sources  of  growth.  Again,  the  growth  accounting exercise is carried out within an international comparative framework.  
After the country‘s political unification, Italy achieved modest rates of sustained per  capita income and productivity growth. However, structural change remained limited before  World War II, and Italy made little headway in catching up the technological leaders of the  time. After the first twenty post-Unification  years of stagnant growth, caused largely by a  weak productivity  performance in  agriculture,  Italy‘s  first  growth spurt  (1881-1911)  was  driven by the manufacturing industry and by services (particularly personal services, credit  and insurance, and trade).  
During  and  between the two  World  Wars, Italian labour  productivity  growth  rates remained  subdued. In  particular,  the  Great  Depression  years  were  characterised  by  low  industrial  labour  productivity  growth  across  the  board.  Italy‘s  ―Golden  Age‖ began  after  1945 and was propelled by manufacturing. Strong productivity growth was also registered in all other sectors (except for government services), thanks to spill-over effects and the new  technology generated in the industrial sector. A crucial factor here was the significant release  of labour from agriculture, which moved into industry and services. Only Japan registered  higher growth rates than Italy during this ―Golden Age‖. 
After a long period of catching-up, Italy overtook the United Kingdom in aggregate  labour  productivity  terms during  the  1970s,  although  there  is  some  uncertainty  about  the  
                                                  
1 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  Alberto  Baffigi,  Federico  Barbiellini  Amidei,  Giuseppe  Bertola, Alessandro  Brunetti, Elio  Cerrito,  Nicholas  Crafts,  Giovanni  Federico,  Alfredo  Gigliobianco,  Paolo  Sestito,  Gianni  Toniolo, as  well as all the  participants of the  Workshop held at Banca d‘Italia, Perugia  in December 2010,  where a preliminary version of this paper was presented, for useful comments and suggestions.  
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the institutions  represented. 
4 

========4========

precise  year  of  ―il  sorpasso‖.2 Since  1993,  however, Italy  has  registered  a  striking  productivity  slowdown,  compared  with  other  countries  as  well  as  Italy‘s  past.  Industrial  growth  has  lost  its previous  impetus,  but  perhaps  of  more  significance  is  the  decline  in  service sector productivity growth at a time when services have come to dominate economic  activity.   
In  a  sense,  then,  Italy  seems  to  have  come  full  circle:  whereas  in  the  first  twenty  years  of  its  unified  history,  low  growth  rates  in  the  large  agricultural sector  held  back aggregate  growth  rates; now  the  services  sector  is  playing  a  similar role.  It  is  tempting  looking at the aggregate data to draw the conclusion that the slowdown was inevitable after  Italy had exhausted its potential for catching up, However, the sectoral analysis gives more  cause for concern. Structural factors appear to be at work here, with Italy failing to follow  other countries in making effective use of information technology in services, which shows  up in weak labour productivity growth in this sector and weak TFP growth in the economy  as a whole. 
The  paper  proceeds  as  follows.  Section  2 describes  the  data  used  for  Italy  and  analyses the time series evidence on its labour shares and labour productivity growth rates.  An exercise in shift-share analysis helps disentangle the contributions of both sectoral labour  productivity growth and structural change to overall productivity growth. Section 3 delves  deeper into Italy‘s long-run sectoral performance by examining labour productivity growth  rates  within  the  industrial  and  services  sectors. Section 4 illustrates  the  differences  in  the  sectoral distribution of the labour force and in labour productivity growth rates in Italy, the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States,  Germany,  Japan  and  India.  It  also  focuses  on  comparative levels of labour productivity calculated at purchasing power parity (PPP), with  the  United  Kingdom  as  the numeraire country. Section 5 performs  a  growth  accounting  exercise in order to gauge total factor productivity‘s contribution to aggregate growth; TFP  growth  rates  are  then  compared  to  those  registered  in  the  other  countries  of  the  sample.  Section  6 draws  some  conclusions.  The  Data  Appendix  sets  out  the  data  sources  and  methods  for  all  the  countries  examined  in  the  paper.  In  particular,  the  newly  constructed  labour and capital time series are presented in full. Finally, the Methodological Appendix  explains how the comparative levels of productivity were constructed and considers ways of  cross-checking the results. 
2.        The Contours of Italian Economic Growth 
The starting point for our comparative study is an analysis of Italy‘s annual sectoral  accounts on output and employment.  
                                                  
2 
Our figures, which make use of substantially revised Italian output data show 1973, but with the GDP figures  available at the time, the more conventional dating of il sorpasso is 1979. 
5 

========5========

2.1 
Italy’s Output and Labour Data 
The value added estimates for the three sectors agriculture, industry and services, as  well  as  GDP, covering  the  period  1861-2010, are new  estimates  provided  by  the  Banca  d‘Italia-ISTAT-Università di Roma Tor Vergata research group (see Baffigi 2011).3 
Data on labour for the overall period 1861 
-20 10 are instead our  
own  new estimates.  
We provide two alternative measures: the headcount (HC) of total workers and the number  
. The territory  covered by our data refers to  Italy  at  
-sector level of disaggregation  
agriculture, forestry and fishing; mineral extraction; manufacturing; construction;  
; transport and communications; credit and insurance;  
sectoral  
of full -time equivalent (FTE) workers 
current boundaries. Both our labour datasets are built at a ten (namely,  
utilities; tr ade and tourism 
personal services; government services) and span the  construct the first dataset, w e  have taken the Vitali (1970) and Zamagni (1987) for the period 1881 linked on, 
two years. We then  obtain annual estimates for the inter 1861 -1951 
collected from  various  source s.  For  the  period  1951 from Golinelli and Monterastelli (1990); for the period  official ISTAT national accounts (201 
estimates for 1861 and 1871, revising the population census (PC)  
through  interpolation  of  observations  from  census  years,  
social and  overall period 1861 -20 10 . In order to  labour force data for census  years from  -1951. We  have then  constructed , and  
data for those  
-census y ears for the overall period  
using  indicators -1970  annual  time  series  are  derived  
1970 -20 10 they  are taken from the  dataset  instead concerns the number  of  
1).  The second  
FTE workers. Following O‘Brien and Toniolo (1991), for the period 1861-1951, PC data is  again  used  for  agriculture,  with  child,  elderly  and  female  labourers  converted  into  male  equivalents, and day labourers assumed to work less than workers on owned or rented arable  land. For  industry  and  services,  employment  figures  are  instead  taken  from  industrial  censuses  (ICs),  made  comparable  by Federico  (2003).  From  1951  onwards, FTE  series  in Golinelli (1998) and ISTAT (2011) are used. Both labour datasets are presented in full in the  Data Appendix, together with complete details of data sources and the methodology behind  
the construction of the series.  
Until  1951,  the  labour  force  data  built  using  PCs are to  be  regarded  as  an  upper- bound estimate of Italy‘s labour supply, whereas the FTE figures, in particular those derived  from  ICs, are  lower-bound  estimates.  We  can  reasonably  assume  that  Italy‘s  actual  employment  figures  fell  within  this  confidence  interval. Figure  1  plots  the  two  labour  measures from 1861 through to 2010 at a three-level sectoral breakdown. The high incidence  of underemployment  in  agriculture,  but  also industry, in  Italy  until  1951  emerges  clearly  from  the  data;  the  services  sector  was  instead  less  affected.  In  this  section,  for  ease  of  exposition, we will only analyse and discuss growth trends implicit in the FTE series, which  are the theoretically preferable data. These growth rates, anyhow, are reasonably similar to  those based on the HC data. In section 4, the HC measure will instead be used, for reasons of  international  comparability. Finally,  all  labour  productivity  figures  will  be  based  on  an  
                                                  
3 
If one wished, the resulting GDP series could be extended backwards to 1700 by using Malanima (2006). In  fact,  Malanima‘s  series  – derived  from  a  reconstructed  long-run  wage  rate  series  – is  ―quite  similar‖  (Malanima, 2006: 124) to Fenoaltea (2005), which was used in Baffigi (2011) – based on direct production data  – for the years 1861-1913, differing only initially due to Malanima‘s lower estimate of the services sector. No  significant shift or break is therefore present in the output data in 1861. 
6 

========6========

output  per  employee  basis, since  reliable  data  on  hours  worked  are  not  available  on  a  consistent basis at a sectoral level for much of the period under consideration.4 
A t  the  time  of  Italy‘s  political  unification  in  1861,  half  of  the  country‘s  total  population was engaged in working activities, of which one third full-time. By 2010 these  activity  rates  had  both  converged  to  around  40 per  cent. What  changed  dramatically  was  instead the sectoral labour shares. Table 1 provides figures on the sectoral distribution of the  FTE labour force between agriculture, industry and services in benchmark census years. In  1861  nearly two  thirds  of  the  total FTE labour  force  worked  in  agriculture,  whilst  the  remaining workers were similarly distributed between industry and services. Whereas until  WWI the  exodus  from  agriculture  was  limited,  the  1930s  but  mostly  WWII  witnessed a  significant  shift  of  the  labour  force  towards  the  non-farm  sectors.  By 1951  the  sectoral  labour  shares  had  converged  to  the  most  balanced  structure  over  the  whole  period; agriculture was still in the lead however, with 43 per cent of the labour force devoted to it.  By 1973, the services sector was instead clearly dominant (at 46 per cent) and continued to  increase  its  importance until  current  times, in  which  it  engages  over  two thirds  of  FTE  workers  against  less  than  a  third  working  in  industry  and with  a  tiny  fraction engaged  in  agriculture – a complete reversal of the picture relative to 1861. The most significant trend is  therefore the  contraction  in  employment  devoted  to  agriculture,  coupled  by  the  steady  increase in importance of the services sector. Industry instead showed an inverted U-shape  pattern, first rising in importance and then declining after the oil shocks in 1973. 
The  reallocation  of  labour  input  away  from  the  agricultural sector,  and  Italy‘s  industrialization  and  tertiarization,  can  be  seen  to  have  gone  hand  in  hand  with  an  improvement  of  general  living  standards,  roughly  proxied  by  GDP  per  head.  As  Table  2  shows, a strong negative relationship between the level of per capita income and the share of  the labour force in agriculture is evident for the overall period 1861-2010. Strong positive  relationships instead emerge relative to industry and services shares. However, the fit of the  regression,  captured  by  the  R2,  is  less  satisfactory  in  the  case  of  industry.  Similar  results  were  found  in  Broadberry,  Federico  and  Klein (2010)  for  a  sample  of  fourteen  European  countries  for  benchmark  years  in  the  period  1870-1992.  We  will  come  back  to  sectoral  labour shares in Section 2.3. 
2.2 Labour productivity growth in Italy 
The value added data, together with the labour input figures, may be used to calculate  indices of labour productivity by major sector and for the aggregate economy, of which the  average  annual  growth  rates can be  computed.  These  are  presented  in  Table  3, alongside  GDP per capita growth rates. 
In  the  first  two  decades  after  Italy‘s  unification, the  overall  annual  labour  productivity growth rate was of 0.3 per cent, the lowest ever registered in our selected sub- periods. Agriculture and industry displayed weak growth rates, whereas labour productivity growth  in  services  was  zero, with  employment  growth  outstripping  that  of  value  added. Malanima  (2007)  argues  that,  from  the  Middle  Ages  (approximately  1300)  until  Italy‘s  unification, labour productivity steadily declined, until its lowest level was reached between  
                                                  
4 
For the more recent years for which data on hours worked are available, a rapid comparison of output per  worker and output per hour worked growth rates will, however, be drawn. 
7 

========7========

1810  and  1820.  Our  data  show  that  after  1861  indeed aggregate labour  productivity  had  begun growing again, albeit at a sluggish pace, confirming the trend reversal. In this period,  working population grew faster than total population, hence explaining the higher GDP per  capita growth rate. In 1881, in fact, nearly 52 per cent of total population was active; this  peak was never again attained. 
In  the  period  1881-1911, all  three  sectors  underwent  a  significant  spurt  in  productivity, thus contributing to the 1.4 per cent overall productivity growth rate. Whereas the labour productivity growth rates in agriculture increased to 1 per cent per year, industry  and services were even better achievers relative to the previous period: the former registering  impressive rates of 1.8 per cent per year, the latter rates of 1.4 per cent, thus reverting from  no to significant positive productivity growth. This was a period of trade tariffs (1887-1894)  and trade wars with France (1887-1898), yet Federico and O‘Rourke (2000) find that Italian  protectionism  only  affected  total  agricultural  output  marginally,  by  less  than  5 per  cent.5 With  a  growing  agricultural  output  and  a  declini ng  engagement  of  labour  in  this  sector,  
labour productivity growth rates in agriculture rose as a result .  As well as transports, which  were  greatly  enhanced by  a boom in railway  construction until 1895 and which, via their  
backward  linkages,  initially  stim ulated  the  extraction  and  construction  industries  and  then  
after 1895 the manufacturing industry for the maintenance, repairs and improvements of the  
railroads (Fenoaltea 2006, pp. 196 -199), the financial sector was also expanding, due to the  
substitution  of  private  bankers  with  first  French -type  crédit  mobilier banks  and  then  German-type  ―mixed  banks‖ after  the  1893  crisis  (Carriero,  Ciocca  and  Marcucci 2003).  Although  the  literature  has  mainly  focused  on  industrialisation  as  the  main  way  out  of  economic backwardness (e.g. Williamson 2011), the figures here presented show how the  growth of the services sector also played a part in this period, especially if compared to its  relative performance in previous years. If one breaks the period down further (1881-1901;  1901-1911), in order to  account for different political regimes  and to isolate the so-called  Giolitti period, one finds that the overall productivity growth rate was higher in the second  sub-period, reflecting a higher growth rate especially in the industrial sector (2.6%), but also  in services (1.7%). However the acceleration, relative to 1861-1881, can already be seen in  the first sub-period, in all three sectors. GDP per head growth was lower than overall labour  productivity growth due to a faster rise in population than in active population. From here  onwards GDP  per  head  growth  rates will  always  be  greater  than  the  aggregate labour  productivity growth rates.6 
                                                  
5 
This result is also reported in the more recent James and O‘Rourke (2010). 
6 
Recall that GDP per head growth rates can be broken dow n in the following way: 
^ ^ ^ 
y X e 
Where y is GDP per head, X is the overall labour productivity, e is the employment rate and hats denote time  
derivatives. 
To give an example, from 1861 to 2010, Italy‘s GDP per head grew at an average yearly rate of 1.58%. When  using the HC measure of labour, this rate is explained by the larger increase in labour productivity (1.81%),  scaled down by the lower employment rate (-0.22%). This is a result similar to the one computed by Daniele  and Malanima (2009). However if one considers the FTE employment rate, the increase in labour productivity  is lower (1.54%)  and the  employment rate  enters positively  into the  equation (0.4%). This picture  seems to  confirm the traditional view by Fuà (1976) which argued that what declined in Italy was the employment rate  of the so-called ―secondary components‖ of the labour force (i.e. child or elderly workers, female  workers).  Seen from another perspective, underemployment declined over the period considered. 
8 

========8========

Between  1911  and  1938,  all  three  sectors  underwent  a  productivity  slowdown  relative  to  the  previous  period,  with  an  overall  growth  rate dropping to  0.7 per  cent. Agriculture  was  the  sector  which  suffered  the  least  in  productivity  terms.  Labour  productivity growth in industry fell to 0.5 per cent per annum, whereas services displayed  marginally  negative growth (-0.1%).  If  one  breaks  the  period  down  further (1911-1929;  1929-1938)  so  as  to  set  apart  the  Great  Depression  years,  industry  turns  out  to  have  performed well  in  the  first  sub-period,  but  very  poorly  in the  1930s. Services  too  shifted  from positive to negative productivity growth. Conversely, labour productivity growth rates  in agriculture were low during WWI and the 1920s, but picked up in the 1930s.  
Conversely, the  period  1938-1951  saw  a  sizeable increase  in  the  overall  labour  productivity  growth  rate,  which  reached  a  yearly  rate  of 1.7 per  cent to  which all  three  sectors contributed. The war years were actually years of negative growth in all three sectors,  which  makes  the  post-1945  growth  even  more  remarkable.  The  substantial  post-WWII increase  in  agricultural  labour  productivity  growth  rates  confirms  Federico  and  Malanima  (2004)‘s view of productivity soaring due to substantial migrations from the countryside and  to  mechanization.  In  industry,  value  added  increased  vis-à-vis  an  unchanged  aggregate  workforce. In the services sector too, employment on the whole stagnated; it grew only in  the  credit  sector – where  in  1936-38  a  new  Banking  Act  was  passed,  strongly  reforming  Italy‘s banking system – and in PA. Real value added of services, instead, nearly doubled in  those years and this led to the substantial increase in services‘ labour productivity. 
The  increase  in  growth  rates  in  the  following  period  (1951-1973)  was  even  more  impressive,  reaching a  hitherto  unprecedented overall average yearly  rate  of 4.8 per  cent,  with  industry growing at  an  exceptional  5.0  per  cent  annual  rate.  This  period,  commonly  defined  the  Golden  Age, clearly  summarizes  a  success  story,  relative  to  Italy‘s  economic  record over the whole 150-year period, but also, as we shall see, in an international context; a  success  story  which  was  propelled  by  industry. Agriculture  and  services too registered  strong yearly growth rates in these two decades. The productivity boom provided a strong  foundation for rapid improvement in living standards: GDP per head reached its highest ever  yearly growth rate (5.1 per cent). Breaking up the period further, so as to gauge the changed  macroeconomic  setting  – full  employment,  rise  in  trade  union  strength,  wage  increases,  inflation, balance of payments deficit – and to evaluate the policy shift – restrictive monetary  policy – in 1963, one finds that the acceleration in all sectors was even greater in the first  sub-period (1951-1963) relative to the second sub-period (1963-1973). 
During the twenty years following the energy crisis and the breakdown of the Bretton  Woods system of fixed exchange rates, growth in agricultural labour productivity continued  to increase, reaching nearly 5 per cent growth per year. It however slowed down in industry and  collapsed  in  the  services  sector,  by  then  the  largest  sector even  in  HC terms.  The  aggregate labour productivity growth rate (2.0 per cent) was thus negatively affected by this  composition effect. Finally, in the last period (1993-2010), all three sectors were affected by  a  significant  labour  productivity  slowdown.  Whereas labour  productivity  in  agriculture  continued to grow at a strong rate, although slower than in the previous periods, probably  due to the exhaustion of the gains from the rationalization of this sector, growth in industry  and services was close to zero. The overall yearly output per worker growth rate dropped 
                                                                                                                                                          
9 

========9========

down to 0.7 per cent, while GDP per head growth fell to 0.6 per cent per year, the same rate  as the one registered in the post-Unification years, the lowest ever. Even if one truncates the  period considered at 2007, to net out the effects of the recent negative downturn, agriculture  continues to be the leading sector (2.9 per cent average yearly growth), industry perks up a  bit  (1 per  cent),  but  services‘  performance  still  remains  weak  (0.7 per  cent).  The  overall  1993-2007 average yearly labour productivity growth rate only increases to 1.0 per cent.  
To  conclude the  section,  we  can  compare our  estimates  of  annual  growth  rates  of  GDP  per  worker  with  previous  productivity  estimates implicit  in  the  work  of  Maddison  (1991 for GDP; 2003 for labour force) and Rossi, Sorgato and Toniolo (1993). Maddison‘s  labour input is total labour force, whereas Rossi et al.‘s labour input is FTE employment.  We  hence  report  the  two  labour  productivity  growth  rates  based  on  our  two  labour  measurements: the first is comparable to Maddison, the second to Rossi et al.. We find some  noteworthy differences,  presented  in  Table  4. Our  results in  fact point  to  a lower  labour  productivity  growth  compared  to  Maddison‘s  until  1938,  and  a  higher  one  thereafter. In  other terms, Italy‘s catch-up began later, but was faster than suggested by Maddison‘s data. Relative to Rossi et al.‘s data, our estimates point to a lower productivity growth during the  Great Depression and to a significantly higher one in the following period, led by the post- WWII  reconstruction  phase.  Our  estimates  for  the  Golden  Age  and  for  the  two  decades  subsequent to the oil shocks are instead in line with Rossi et al.’s. Maddison and Rossi et  al.‘s data end in 1992 and hence so does our comparison. For the post-WWII period we can  also  compare  our  labour  productivity  growth  rates,  defined  as  output  per  worker,  with  growth rates of output per hour worked as in Crafts and Magnani (2010). As Table 5 shows,  the  two  estimates show  very  similar  patterns, but with  the  latter  exceeding  the  former  as  hours worked per person fell substantially during the post-war period. 
2.3 Structural change in the Italian economy 
As is well known, the aggregate growth rate of labour productivity is not merely the  average of sectoral productivity growth rates with constant weights. Labour productivity can  in fact change not only because of changes of the labour-productivity ratio within individual sectors  but  also  because  of  structural  change  between  sectors,  i.e.  systematic  shifts  of  employment  shares  across  sectors.  We  have  already  seen  data  on  sectoral  shares  of  employment  in  Italy  in  Table  1.  In  contrast to  more  developed  countries,  the  higher  proportion of the agricultural labour force in Italy in the late nineteenth century meant that  the latter country had larger scope for net gains linked to the reallocation of resources. In  fact, given the lower level of value added per employee in agriculture and the higher level in  industry and services, the shift out of the former low-value added activity contributed to the  process of Italy‘s development and catching up.  
We  can  quantify  the  relative  importance  of  internal  labour  productivity  growth  in  Italy‘s three sectors (agriculture; industry; services) and of structural change by performing  an exercise in shift-share analysis. The basic approach is derived from Nordhaus (1972), in  which  the  growth  of  aggregate  productivity  is  broken  down in  order  to  disentangle  its  structural components. The level of aggregate labour productivity (X0) is given by aggregate  value added (VA0) divided by aggregate employment (L0), which can also be written as the  weighted  sum  of  the  labour  productivity  in  each  sector  (A=  agriculture;  I  =  industry;  T=  tertiary sector) with employment shares as weights. 
10 

========10========

(1)   X0 = VA0/L0 =  
i 
X 
i 
Si                                               A,I,T 
Where S 
i 
is the share of employment in sector i and Xi is the productivity level in  sector i. 
By taking time derivatives (denoted by hats above variables), we obtain: 
(2) 
^ X 
0 
=  
^ X 
i 
Si 
^ Si A,I,T 
Xi 
i 
A,I,T 
i 
Dividing through by X 
0 
and multiplying and dividing the first term by Xi: 
^ ^ ^ 
(3)    X 
0/ X0 
=  X i/ X 
i 
Si ( Xi / Xo) Si ( Xi / Xo) 
i A,I,T i A,I,T 
We can rewrite equation (3) in value added terms. After a few simple computations,  one obtains: 
(4)   
^ 
X 
0/ X0 
=   
^ X i 
/ Xi 
(VA 
i 
/VAo) 
i 
VA 
i 
/VAo A,I,T 
^ (L 
i 
/Li 
^ Lo /Lo) 
i 
A,I,T 
Where VAi is the value added in sector i and Li is employment in sector i. Following  Stiroh (2002), the value-added shares may be computed as average two-period sectoral value  added shares.7 
The first term on the right hand side of equation (4) is the ―pure‖ (Nordhaus 2001) or  ―direct‖  (Stiroh  2002)  productivity  effect,  also  called  the  ―within  effect‖  (Antonelli  and  Barbiellini  Amidei  2007).  It  is  a  weighted  average  of  the  productivity  growth  rates  in  component  sectors,  where  the  weights  are period-average nominal  value-added  shares  of  each  sector.  As  the  productivity  in  one  sector  grows,  aggregate  productivity  rises  in  proportion to the sector‘s size. The within effect may thus be interpreted as the productivity  effect if there were no changes in value added composition across sectors. The second term  is  the  ―reallocation  effect‖  (Stiroh  2002),  which  captures  the  effect  of  changing  shares  of  employment  on  aggregate  productivity.  It  is  also  called  the  ―Denison  effect‖  (Nordhaus  2001),  after  Edward  Denison  who  was  the  first  to  point out  how  the  shift  from  a  low- productivity-level  sector  to  a  high-productivity-level  sector  raises  productivity  even  if  the  growth rates in the two sectors are the same (Denison 1967).8 
Broadberry (1998), however, argues that a major problem with this ort hodox shift - share  approach  is  that  it  assumes  that  productivity  growth  rates  in  each  sector  would  be  
unaffected  by  the  absence  of  structural  change.  If  Kindleberger‘s  (1967)  assumption  that  surplus labour was being drawn from agriculture and reallocated to nonfarm activities with  little or no loss of agricultural output is accepted, as is reasonable, then restoring labour to  agriculture  would  not  have  positively  affected  output,  but  simply  lowered  labour  
                                                  
7 
Note that the right hand side of the equation may not be exactly equal to the labour productivity growth rate  on the left-hand side due to the omission of second-order terms and to rounding up effects. 
8 
Nordhaus (2001) argues  that the  Denison effect term,  which arise s because  of differences in the levels of  
productivity  by  sector,  should  normally  be  excluded  when  using  the  productivity  measure  as  a  measure  of  
welfare. 
11 

========11========

productivity  growth  rates.  On  the  other  hand,  the  shift  of  labour  away  from  nonfarm  activities would not only have lowered labour, but also output, leaving labour productivity  growth rates unaltered. Therefore, had agriculture continued to employ an unchanged share  of  workers,  due  to  an  absence  of  structural change,  labour  productivity  growth  rates  in  agriculture  would  have  been  lower.  Hence,  Broadberry (1998) modifies  the  direct  productivity term in the following manner: 
(5)   
^ 
X 
0/ X0 
=   
i 
^ (VA 
i 
/VAo) 
i 
VA 
i 
/VAo A,I,T 
^ (L 
i 
/ Li 
^ Lo 
/ Lo) 
i 
A,I,T 
Where: 
i 
^ X i / X 
i 
^ (Lo 
^ 
Li) if S 
i<0 
^ 
i 
X i / Xi if S 
i≥0 
In this way, in a declining sector, the actual productivity growth rate is reduced by  the difference between the growth rate of the aggregate labour force and the growth rate of  the labour force in the particular sector, whereas in expanding sectors the actual productivity  growth rate is used.9 The modified shift -share calculation can be seen as a generalization of  
Denison (1968)  and it is also adopt ed by Crafts and T oniolo (2010) . 
The results of the modified shift -share calculations for Italy over key sub -periods and  over the period 1861 -20 10 as a whole are given in Figure  2.10 The corrections related to the  modified  shift -share  analysis  are  large  mainly  in the  1973 -19 93  and  1993 -20 10 periods,  when  shares  in  not  only  agriculture,  but  also  in  industry,  were  declining. The  shift  from  industry to services in fact characterized the process of structural change since the 1970s. 
What emerges clearly from this picture is that  in periods of low productivity growth (i.e. the  
first  twenty  years  after  Italy‘s  political  unification;  the  two  World  Wars  period;  the  past  fifteen  years)  structural  change  accounts  for  the  bulk  of  aggregate  labour  productivity  growth. Pure productivity growth was instead nearly zero, if not negative. Therefore shifts of  employment away from agriculture to higher labour productivity level sectors managed to  boost the overall productivity rate in these critical sub-periods. The years of Italy‘s first spurt  (1881-1913) and of its ―economic miracle‖ (1945-1973) were instead characterized by large  direct  productivity  growth  in  both  industry  and  services  sectors.  The  1973-1993  period  growth  was  instead  characterized  by  an  equally  balanced  internal  growth  and  structural  change. In the long run (1861-2010), structural change accounted for approximately 35 per  cent of Italy‘s labour productivity growth. 
                                                  
9 
These calculations are to be regarded as upper-bound estimates of the effects of structural change (Broadberry  1998). 
10 
We here choose to modify the sub -periods slightly with respect to our first periodization, dictated by census  
years, in order to better capture Italy‘s different phases of growth. 
12 

========12========

2.4 A first overview of Italy’s long-run growth 
To conclude this section, Italy‘s 150-year development process can be summarised in  the following manner: 
The  first  eighty  years  of  Italy‘s  unified  history  were,  overall,  a  period  of  modest  growth,  notwithstanding  Italy‘s  economic  backwardness  in  1861.  The  1881-1911  period  fared relatively better than the average (1901-1911 even more so), but the country‘s growth  was soon halted, and reversed, by thirty years of war and recession. Industry was no doubt the  main  engine  in  this  first  bout  of  acceleration,  but  the  services  sector too saw  an  interesting increase in its productivity growth rates in those years. The two World Wars and  the Great Depression years were instead years of negative or low productivity growth, in all  sectors. 
After  WWII,  Italy  registered  outstanding  growth  rates,  in  all  three  sectors,  with  industry again in the lead. The country not only was successful in catching up, but actually  overtook, as we shall see, other developed countries by 1973. 
After  1973,  although  overall  growth  rates  were  still  relatively  high, they  were  strongly conditioned by the services sector‘s modest performance, which by then was by far  the largest sector. After 1993, productivity growth rates fell in all three sectors, with services  virtually grinding to a halt. 
A significant factor in Italy‘s development process was  the structural change in its  economy: overall, the shift of labour from low-level labour productivity sectors (agriculture)  to high-level labour productivity sectors (industry and services) accounted for approximately  35 per  cent  of  total  labour  productivity  growth.  Whereas  internal  productivity  growth  explained  most  of  the  aggregate  growth  in  fast-growing  sub-periods,  the  reallocation  of  labour away from agriculture to the industry and services sectors was particularly relevant in  contributing to aggregate productivity growth during Italy‘s stagnant periods. 
3.        A Closer Look at Italy’s Sectoral Performance  
The three-sector analysis of Italy‘s development process, conducted in the previous  section, leaves open many questions. Which sectors drove Italy‘s first industria lization and  tertiarization spurt in the Giolitti period? Which sectors were more affected by the interwar  slump? Was Italy‘s exceptional post-WWII productivity growth evenly distributed within its  industrial  and  services  sectors,  or  were  some  sectors  more dynamic  than  others?  Is  it  the  services sector as a whole which is dragging down productivity growth rates in more recent  years, or are there some services sectors which are more sluggish than others? This section  provides  further  insight  into Italy‘s  long-run  labour  productivity  dynamics  within  the  industrial and services sectors in order to draw a distinctive and more sharply focused view  of the forces driving, and constraining, Italy‘s growth process. Again, for data we rely on our  newly constructed ten-sector FTE  labour dataset, as well as similarly disaggregated VA data  taken from Baffigi (2011).11 
                                                  
11 
At this level of disaggregation, Baffigi (2011) provide data covering the period 1861-1970. Official ISTAT  (2011)  VA  data  have  therefore  been  used  for  the  period  1970-2010,  after  having  been  homogeneously  reclassified. 
13 

========13========

3.1        The structure of employment and labour productivity growth 
A quick glance at Figure 3 shows that industrial labour was nearly all employed in  manufacturing.  Only  sixty  years  after  Italy‘s  unification  another  industrial  sector  visibly  surfaced, the construction industry, which in 1921 accounted  for 11 per cent of industrial  labour  and  subsequently  increased  in  size,  reaching  its  current  share  of  one third  of  total  industry. The extractive and utilities industry were and remain tiny, yet underwent different  evolutions. Whereas the mining sector was stable at 3 per cent between 1881-1951, and then  shrank  to  its  current  1  per  cent  after  1973,  utilities  began  at  zero  on  the  eve  of  Italy‘s  unification and slowly but steadily moved up to the current 2-3 per cent. Employment within  the  services  sector  was instead more  diffused,  as  Figure  4  shows.  Trade  and  personal  services were the largest sectors from the onset, roughly accounting for a total 60-80 per cent  of the aggregate services sector over the whole period. Transport and communications were  also quite stable within a range of 10-20 per cent. Labour engaged in the credit and insurance  sector grew from approximately zero to the current 4 per cent. Government services were  more volatile over time, employing approximately 10 per cent of the total services‘ labour- force in 1861, reaching a peak of 33 per cent in 1973 and currently at around 22 per cent. 
Table 6 adopts  the  same  periodization  as  in  Table  3  in  order  to  present  annual  average growth rates of labour productivity within the industrial and services sectors. The  sectors we consider immediately stand out as being highly diverse in terms of their labour productivity performance, thus underlining the importance of a disaggregated analysis.  In  the  immediate  post-Unification  years, manufacturing,  on  the  one  hand,  and  transport  and  communications,  on  the  other,  recorded  positive  labour  productivity  growth  rates.  Yet  all  other  sectors  had  no,  or  negative,  productivity  growth,  thus  explaining  the  low  or  nil  aggregate industrial and services growth rates. 
Between  1881  and  1911  Italy‘s  first  productivity  spurt  was  driven  in  industry  by  manufacturing and construction. This finding tallies with Fenoaltea‘s (2005) claim that the  construction of railways exerted a positive pull on these sectors. When focusing only on the  Giolitti  period,  public  utilities and  mining also  played an  important  role. These  were  the  years, in fact, in which the electrification of the country also received a significant impulse. In the services sectors, annual average labour productivity growth rates were positive across  the board from 1881 through to 1911, a result which has never been repeated in Italy‘s 150  year  history.  The  three leading  sectors  became  personal  services,  trade,  and  credit  and  insurance. Transport and communications dropped from leader to laggard, although in the  restricted 1901-1911 period this sector displayed a faster growth rate (1.35 per cent) relative  to 1881-1901. All these services sectors are traditionally those that accompany the process of  industrialization and urbanization, undertaken by Italy in those years. 
In the following three decades, manufacturing, but also public utilities, contributed to  the positive, albeit low, overall industrial productivity growth rate. However, if one zooms in  on  the  Great  Depression  years,  all  four  industrial  sectors  suffered  in  productivity  terms,  relative to the previous sub-period (1911-1929); public utilities was the sector which fared  better. Within the services sectors, transport and communications and credit and insurance  confirmed their leadership in productivity terms, even during the troubled 1930s. In fact, on  the one hand, these were the years in which horse-drawn carts were gradually being replaced  by trucks and lorries (Battilani, Bertagnoni and Vignini 2008). On the other, owing to swift  and ―secret‖ bailouts of Italy‘s main mixed banks during the Great Depression, the country‘s  
14 

========14========

financial system was saved from collapse (Toniolo 1970); this is confirmed by no significant  changes in sectoral productivity outcomes in those years. Productivity growth in trade and  PA  was  instead  negative  during  the  Great  Depression  years,  thus  contributing  to  the  aggregate negative growth rate. 
The run-up to 1951, in particular after WWII, was characterized by strong positive  growth rates in most sectors. Productivity in the credit and insurance sector instead fell, due  to a downturn in banks‘ value added during the war. Conversely, these are the years in which  labour productivity in government services grew at its fastest pace of 0.6 per cent  yearly.  During  the  subsequent  twenty  years (1951-1970),  all  sectors‘  productivity  grew  at  exceptional rates,  with  the  two  exceptions  of  construction  (0.5  per  cent)  and government  services  (-0.9  per  cent).  If  one  calculates  average  annual  growth  rates  between  1945  and  1963, manufacturing was the leader with annual average labour productivity growth rates of  13.2 per cent, closely followed by mining, credit and insurance, and personal services. This  result confirms the traditional view of manufacturing activities being the key to post-WWII  growth.12 These  double -digit  growth  rates  however  halved  in  the  period 1963 -1970. Manufacturing remained by far the  most important  driver of industrial productivity growth  
until  1993.  Within  the  services  sector,  both  credit  and  insurance  and  private  services  
registered negative productivity growth rates. Transport and commun ication s and, to a lesser  extent, trade offset the negative performance of the former sectors. Labour productivity in  
the  government services sector grew  again  at its record 0.6 per cent rate.  
In  the  last  period  considered (1993 -2010) ,  industrial  producti vity  growth  was  underpinned by the fast -growing but small public utilities sector, and by the slower -growing  but  large  manufacturing  sector.  In  the  services  sector,  we  again  find  considerable  
heterogeneity  in  labour  productivity  growth  rates. As  Timmer  et al. (2010,  p.  13)  clearly  state: ―the treatment of the services sector as a homogenous and stagnant sector, in contrast  to  dynamic  manufacturing,  is  no  longer  warranted‖. In  fact,  productivity  in  transport  and  communications and credit and insurance grew annually at approximately 2 per cent(relative  to a 1 per cent rate in manufacturing); government services confirmed their growth rate of  0.6 per cent. Lacklustre growth in trade and negative growth in personal services explained  the low overall productivity growth rate of 0.4 per cent. When netting out the effect of the  recent recession, and hence ending our analysis in 2007, trade doubles its labour productivity  growth rate (0.7 per cent), but the negative  growth rate of personal services‘ productivity  actually increases. 
3.2        An overview of Italy’s industry and services labour productivity growth 
Drilling deeper into Italy‘s labour productivity dynamics, the main conclusions that  can be drawn  are the following: 
Manufacturing was a relevant driver of Italy‘s industrialization, and growth process  in  general,  throughout  the  country‘s  150-year  history.  Accelerated  growth  rates  of  labour  productivity were registered in the Giolitti era (2.35 per cent) and the post-WWII decades  (6.22  per  cent in  1951-70  and  4.22  per  cent  in  1970-1993). In  contrast,  the  non- manufacturing  sectors  presented  fluctuating  performances,  but  contributed  less  to  overall  economic performance given their size. 
                                                  
12 
See Antonelli and Barbiellini Amidei (2007) for a breakdown of the manufacturing sector in the period 1950- 2000. 
15 

========15========

Transport  and  communications  were  the  only  services  sector  which  registered  positive labour productivity growth rates over the whole period, with intense accelerations in  particular after 1938. Trade and tourism also performed well after this date (and in 1881- 1911), with the exception of the most recent period.  
Labour  productivity  in  credit  and  insurance alternated  between  bursts  of  positive  growth and bouts of negative growth. In particular, the latter coincided with the first twenty  years  after  the  country‘s  unification,  when  the  banking  and  financial  system  was  highly  fragmented and underdeveloped, the World War Two years and the 1970-1993 sub-period.  Credit and insurance is however the smallest of the sectors considered, hence contributing  little to the aggregate services productivity dynamics. 
Personal services‘ productivity registered high growth only in two sub-periods (1881- 1911;  1951-1970), but  has  been  declining  since 1970,  contributing  heavily  to  the  productivity slowdown of the most recent period (1993-2010), given its large size. Trade too  is also to blame for current labour productivity dynamics in the services sector. 
Government  services  on  the  whole  registered  little  productivity  growth,  with  the  exception of the Giolitti era. They have displayed a stable and positive 0.6 per cent yearly  productivity growth rate since the 1970s, by no means an impressive rate, but sufficient to  avoid being adjudicated the main cause of the recent productivity slowdown. 
4.        Italy’s Productivity Performance in International Perspective 
So far, we have focused on Italy‘s growth performance during different periods since  1861. In this section, we place that performance in an international perspective by making  comparisons with a sample of other countries. Since it is widely recognised that economic  backwardness provides scope for relatively fast catch-up growth, it is important to consider  levels  of  productivity  as  well  as  growth  rates  (Gerschenkron  1966;  Abramovitz  1986;  Baumol  1986).  And  since  levels  and  growth  rates  of  productivity  may  vary  between  agriculture,  industry  and  services,  we  need  to  consider  performance  in  all  three  major  sectors,  as  well  as  the  total  economy-wide  performance  (Broadberry  1998; 2006).13 The  sampl e of countries chosen includes the United Kingdom,  the  United States,  Germany, Japan  and India.  The U nited Kingdom was t he first industrialised country , the per capita income  leader  during  the  nineteenth  century and  the  richest  European  country  for  much  of  the  
twentieth century,  and  has  thus  been widely used as the  numeraire country in international  comparisons  of  productivity,  particularly  those  involving  European  countries.  As  the  productivity leader during the twentieth century, the United States is included to represent  the technological frontier. Germany attained its political unification in the second half of the  XIXth century (in 1871), similarly to Italy. However, in contrast to Italy, Germany quickly  emerged as a major industrial power to challenge Britain‘s industrial dominance and remains  Europe‘s largest industrial producer and exporter today. In addition, we have included two  Asian  countries to  provide  a  more  global  perspective.  Japan  was  the  first  non-western  country  to  industrialise,  following  the  Meiji  Restoration  in  1868,  which  can  be  seen  as  a  major institutional shock similar to Italian reunification in 1861. India provides an example  of a much less developed country, notwithstanding its recent impressive growth performance  
                                                  
13 
To achieve international comparability we are obliged to revert back to a three-sector disaggregation. 
16 

========16========

and  its  large  size  in  the  world  economy  as  a  consequence  of  its  massive  population (Bosworth and Collins 2008). 
For data, we rely mainly on the historical national accounts of the above-mentioned  countries, as explained in detail in the Data Appendix. An important part of the methodology  involves the use of more than one benchmark to ensure the consistency between information  on  comparative  levels  and  growth  rates  of  labour  productivity,  as  discussed  in  the  Methodological Appendix. 
4.1       The structure of employment 
Before  we  analyse  productivity  performance in  the  different  parts  of  the  Italian economy  in  international  comparative  perspective,  it  is  instructive  to  note  the  changing  structural balance of our six sample economies since the late nineteenth century. The data  showing the breakdown  of the labour force between agriculture, industry and services are  given in Table 7. As already discussed in section 2, the Italian data show the classic pattern  of development noted by Kuznets (1974) and Clark (1951), with the economy dominated by  agriculture at low levels of development, followed by a phase of industrial-led development  and leading ultimately to a dominance of services. Note that agriculture still accounted for  more  than  half  of  all  employment  in  1936,  while  industry  continued  to  increase  its  share  until 1973. This general pattern of development can also be seen in the data for the United  Kingdom, the United States, Germany and Japan, but only to a much lesser extent in the later  developing India. 
Despite  the  general  pattern,  there  have  been  some  substantial differences between  countries  in  the  timing  of  the  release  of  labour  from  agriculture.  Italy‘s  structural  transformation  away  from  agriculture  occurred  much  later  than  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the  share  of  employment  in  agriculture  in  1871  was  just  22.2  per  cent.  Italy took  almost another century to reach this level of development. Italy‘s pattern of structural change  was more similar to that of the United States and Germany, where agriculture continued to  account for around half of all employment in 1870/71. The similarity becomes even closer  when  Italy‘s  development  trajectory  is  compared  to  that  of  Japan,  where  agriculture continued to account for around half of employment until after World War II. Finally, Italy‘s  pattern  of  structural  change  clearly  looks  much  more  developed  than  that  of  India,  where  agriculture  continued  to  account  for  nearly  two-thirds  of  employment  at  the  end  of  the  second millennium. 
It  is  also  worth  noting  in  Table 7 some  differences  in  the  relative  importance  of  industry and services as labour shifted out of agriculture. As the first industrial nation, the  United Kingdom accounted for a large share of world industrial exports and production in  the  nineteenth  century and  the  first  half  of  the  twentieth  century,  and  hence  redeployed  a  large  share  of  its  labour  force  into industry.  As Germany  industrialised  from  the  late  nineteenth century, it also built up a large export business and hence transferred a large share  of its labour  force  from  agriculture  to industry.  Although  the  United  States  also  enjoyed  industrial export success, exports accounted for a smaller share of economic activity than in  the more open European economies. Combined with the high levels of labour productivity  achieved in US industry already by the late nineteenth century, this meant that industry did  not account for as large a share of employment as in Germany or the United Kingdom. The  sectoral  breakdown  is  slightly  different  in  the  case  of  Japan,  where  it  is  not  possible  to  provide  a  clean  break  between  industry  and  services  before  World  War  II,  due  to  the  
17 

========17========

inclusion  of  gas,  electricity  and  water  together  with  transport  and  communications  in  facilitating  industry.  Nevertheless,  the  growing  success  of  Japanese  industry  in  export  markets  is  reflected in  the  rising  share  of mining  and manufacturing  in  employment. All  these  countries  seem  to  have  followed  an  industry-led  development  process until  at  least  World War II. After 1950, the share of industry began to decline in the United States and the  United Kingdom, with services becoming the most dynamic sector. However, in Germany  and Japan, industry continued to expand its share of employment until 1973, and Italy also  followed this pattern.  
Increasingly,  services  have  come  to  dominate  the  employment  structure.  Services  was  already  the  largest  sector  in  the  United  Kingdom  by  1930  and  in the  United  States,  where  industrial  labour  productivity  was  exceptionally  high,  as  early  as  in  1870.  In  Germany, services came to employ more people than industry only after 1973, and Italy was  closer  to  the  German  than  the  UK  case,  with  services  becoming larger  than  industry  just  before 1973. The cases of India and Japan provide an interesting contrast with the European  economies considered here, with both economies showing relatively large service sectors at  early stages of development. 
A  number  of  conclusions  follow  immediately  from  this  evidence  on  the  sectoral  distribution  of  labour.  First,  since  agriculture  dominated  economic  activity  in  most  economies during the late nineteenth century, low productivity growth in agriculture at this  time must  mean  low  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Second,  although  industry  never  came  to  play  as  dominant  a  role  in  total  employment  as  agriculture,  its  importance did clearly increase in the first half of the twentieth century, so that achieving  high  productivity  growth  in  industry  became  an  important  determinant  of  overall  productivity growth performance. Third, during the second half of the twentieth century and  into the twenty-first century, high productivity growth in services has become essential for high productivity growth overall, as services have come to exercise the kind of dominance  over economic activity exerted by agriculture during the nineteenth century. 
4.2         Labour productivity growth by sector 
The overall pattern of Italian labour productivity growth has already been noted in  Section 2. During the pre-World War II period, growth of total value added per employee  was generally quite  modest, but  with  some periods slightly faster  than  others.  The  fastest  annual labour productivity growth in Italy before World War II was recorded between 1881  and 1911 at 1.3 per cent. There then followed a period of very rapid productivity growth,  reaching  6.2 per  cent  per  year  between  1951 and  1973.  Since  then,  the  Italian  labour  productivity  growth rate has  declined,  particularly  since  1993. In  assessing  which  sectors  account for these variations in Italy‘s overall productivity growth in panel A of Table 8, it is  important to bear in mind our previous observations on the relative size of the major sectors. Before 1881, agriculture experienced the fastest labour productivity growth in Italy and was  also  the  largest  sector,  so  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  industry  and  services  played  a  subsidiary  role  during  this  period.  Between  1881  and  1973, Italian industry  recorded  the  highest rate of labour productivity  growth in three of the four sub-periods. Since industry  was  increasing  its  share  of  employment  substantially  in  Italy  during  these  years,  this  is  suggestive  of  a  period  of  industry-led  development.  Since 1973,  the  slow-down  in Italian  productivity growth can be accounted for by a sluggish labour productivity growth rate in  services, which has seen a dramatic increase in its share of employment. 
18 

========18========

However, before we rush to conclude that Italian agriculture performed well before  1881, or praise Italian industry between 1881 and 1973, or indeed condemn the performance  of  Italian  services  since  1973,  we  need  to  place  this  Italian  experience  in  international  perspective. For  it  is  surely  easier  to  achieve  rapid growth  while  the  rest  of  the  world  is  booming rather than while it is stagnating or contracting. The first point to note is that labour  productivity  growth  in  Italian  agriculture  between  1861  and 1881  was  not  exceptional  by  international standards. Indeed, it was substantially exceeded by the United Kingdom and by  the United States. Second, labour productivity growth in Italian industry stands out as being  noticeably higher  than  in  other  countries  only  during two  sub-periods.  Italy  recorded  the  highest  rate of  labour  productivity  growth  in  industry between  1881  and  1911,  although  German  industrial  labour  productivity  grew  almost  as  quickly  at  this  time.  Furthermore,  although  industrial  labour  productivity  growth  during  the  period  1951-1973 was  substantially  higher  in  Italy  than  in  the  United  Kingdom,  the  United  States,  India  and  Germany,  it  was  nevertheless  surpassed  by  the  even  more  impressive  performance  of  Japanese mining and manufacturing. A third point worthy of comment is that Italy‘s labour  productivity  growth  in  services  since  1973  has  been  strikingly  slower  than  in  all  other  countries,  particularly  since  1993.  Given  the  growing  dominance  of  services  in  economic  activity, it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that this  must  have  been  a  major  factor  in  Italy‘s overall slower labour productivity growth at this time. However, before seeing this as  a  failure  of  Italian  services,  we  need  to  consider  comparative  labour  productivity  levels,  since it is also widely accepted that economic backwardness opens up opportunities for rapid  catch-up growth. The flip side of the coin is that starting from high levels of productivity  makes it harder to achieve rapid rates of productivity growth. 
4.3         Comparative labour productivity levels 
Table  9 provides  an  overview  of  Italy‘s  comparative  labour  productivity  level  between  1871  and  2007,  broken  down  by  sector.  The  United  Kingdom  is  the  numeraire country, with the UK labour productivity level taking a value of 100 in all years and in all  sectors. The GDP column in panel A thus informs us that at the level of the economy as a  whole, Italy failed to catch-up on the United Kingdom at all between 1871 and 1936, had  embarked  on  a  catching-up  trajectory  by  1951  and  had  overtaken  the  UK  by  1973.  Since  1993,  however,  the  United  Kingdom  has  been  catching-up  on  Italy.  Note  that  this  levels  analysis, even at the aggregate level, already takes some of the sting out of the more critical  commentaries on recent Italian productivity performance. Slower productivity growth since  1993 can be seen as a result of the end of catching-up, with Italy reaching the technological  frontier.  Furthermore,  the  breakdown  by  sector  reinforces  this  conclusion,  since  services,  where the labour productivity growth rate has most obviously lagged behind rates achieved  in other countries, had achieved the largest productivity lead during the 1970s. 
This optimistic reading of recent Italian productivity performance would need to be  qualified in the light of the US/UK comparison which is presented in panel B of Table 8. For  here, we  see  that  at  the  aggregate  level,  the  US  labour  productivity  lead  over  the  United  Kingdom  remains  substantial.  Furthermore,  the  US  productivity  lead  in  services  has  remained  substantial  while  the  Italian  productivity  lead  over  the  United  Kingdom  has  evaporated since 1993. One factor often used to explain the high level of labour productivity  in US services is the widespread use of information and communications technology, which  has  sometimes  been  seen  as  relatively  slow  to  diffuse in  Italy (Timmer et  al.  2010). The  
19 

========19========

US/UK  comparison  also  helps  to  put  the  achievements  of  Italian  industry  during  the  twentieth century into perspective. During most of the first half of the twentieth century, the  average  Italian  industrial  worker  produced less  than  half  the  output  of  his/her  British  counterpart, who in turn produced around half the output of the average American industrial  worker.  This  large  transatlantic  labour  productivity  gap  has  widely  been  attributed  to  differences in technology, with high-throughput or mass production techniques developed in  the  United  States,  but difficult  to  apply  in European conditions  because  of  differences  in  factor  endowments and  demand  conditions  (Hounsell 1984;  Broadberry  1997;  Chandler  1990).  
The comparison of Germany with the United Kingdom suggests that the scale of the  Anglo-Italian  productivity  gap  in  agriculture  may  be  explained  more  by  a  strong  UK  performance than by a weak Italian performance, since the Anglo-German productivity gap  in agriculture also remained quite large until very recently. Furthermore, Italian productivity  in  agriculture  has  been  substantially  higher  than  in  Asia  throughout  the  period  under  consideration. It is perhaps not surprising that agricultural labour productivity has been very  low in India, but the scale of the agricultural productivity gap in Japan has also been very  large.  
4.4           An overview of Italian productivity performance in international perspective 
Putting together the preceding sections on the sectoral distribution of employment,  productivity  growth rates by sector and comparative productivity levels by sector, we can  arrive  at  the  following  conclusions  about  Italy‘s  productivity  performance  in  international  perspective.  
During the period before World War I, Italy made very little headway in catching up on the  United  Kingdom,  the  European  productivity  leader  at  that  time.  Given  the  substantial  productivity  gaps  that  existed  at  this  time,  particularly  in  agriculture  and  industry,  this  performance must be regarded as disappointing.  
During the interwar period, Italy continued to make very little headway in catching up with  the United Kingdom, with productivity growth remaining at modest pre-war rates. Since the  United States was forging ahead of the United Kingdom at this time, Italy was falling further  behind  the  technological  frontier.  In  common  with  other  European  countries,  Italy  was  hampered in adopting US high-throughput technology in industry, due to the abundance of  cheap labour and the fragmentation of markets. 
In the years immediately following World War II, Italy embarked on a period of very rapid  catch-up growth, underpinned by rapid productivity growth in all sectors, but particularly in  industry. Between 1951 and 1973, Italian labour productivity grew by 6.9 per cent annually  in industry, exceeded only by an even more exceptional burst of catch-up growth in Japanese  industry. By 1973 Italy had caught up with the United Kingdom in the economy as a whole,  and was beginning to forge ahead, particularly in industry. At this point, growth rates slowed  down,  as  would  be  expected  within  a  catching-up  framework.  Nevertheless,  a  substantial  productivity  gap  with  the  United  States  remains,  particularly  in  services,  where  Italy  has  lagged in the adoption of information and communications technology. 
20 

========20========

5.             Accounting for Italian Economic Growth 
In  this  section  we  perform a  standard  growth  accounting  exercise,  with  a  two-fold  aim. On the one hand, further insight into labour productivity dynamics can be provided by  examining  the  evolution  of  Italy‘s  capital  intensity  and  total  factor  productivity  over  the  period  1861-2011.  On  the  other,  the  computed  residual,  in  broad  terms,  reflects  the  development  of  Italy‘s  ability  to  innovate,  as  well  as  its  organizational  and  institutional  changes. Together with evidence of changing contributions coming from primary inputs to  GDP growth, the analysis provides additional insights into the restructuring  process of the  Italian economy in a historical perspective. This could provide a benchmark against which  the  dismal  performance  in  more  recent  times  can  be  compared  and  better  appraised  in  its  intensity and duration.  
5.1       Methodology, sources and an analysis of Italy’s capital stock 
We have followed the standard theoretical reference, namely the basic neoclassical  growth model described in Solow (1957), in order to disentangle the contributions of labour,  capital and technological change to the development of the Italian economy. In particular,  we  have  assumed  that  output  is  described  by  a  standard  neoclassical  Hicks-neutral  
^ 
production  function.  Total  factor  productivity  (TFP),  A/ At (where  hats  denote  time  
^ derivatives) ,  is thus computed as a residual, as the difference between output growth ( Y/Yt)  and the weighted  average of the  growth rates of  factor inputs, labour (L 
t) and capital (Kt), as  presented in equation (6): 
^ ^ ^ ^ 
(6)  A / A 
t 
Y/Y 
t 
[ 
t 
Lt/ L 
t 
(1 
t 
) K / Kt] 
w here  αt = wtLt/Yt is the labour share of output, wt is the unit wage and (1-αt) is capital‘s share of output under the assumptions of perfect competition and constant returns to scale. 
Whilst  it  is  agreed  that  distortions  from  imperfect  competition,  externalities  and  production  spillovers,  omitted  inputs,  cyclical  fluctuations,  non-constant  returns  to  scale,  input  reallocations,  etc.  confound  the  interpretation  of  this  residual  as  a  pure  technology  measure,  ―it  remains  a  useful  indicator  of  the  underlying  techno logical  factors‖  (Stiroh  2001). Basu and Fernald (1997), for instance, find a high correlation between a traditional  Solow  residual  and  a  more  sophisticated  index  of  technology  that  controls  for  market  imperfections. However, a further caveat must be stated in our exercise, due to the very large  time-span  we  consider: since  1861, the  market  structure  and  the  institutional  setting  have undergone  radical  changes in  Italy,  as  everywhere  in  the  world, hence adding  substantial  noise in the residual approach to TFP measurement.  
In order to implement the growth accounting exercise, firstly we have constructed a  historical  series  of  physical  capital  stock  in  Italy  over  the  period  since  1861.  For  this  purpose, we have adopted the same approach followed by ISTAT to compile official figures  for gross and net capital stocks for years starting in 1980 (Lupi and Mantegazza 1994). This  leads  us,  among  other  things,  to  adopt  a  linear  rule  for  depreciation,  which  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  constant  depreciation  rate,  as  used  thus  far  in  many  historical  reconstructions (e.g. Rossi, Sorgato and Toniolo1993, based upon Pagliano and Rossi 1992).  We refer to the Data Appendix for a clearer discussion of this issue, as well as a description  
21 

========21========

of the methodology underlying our reconstruction. We compute net and gross capital stock,  at current prices and at chained values, for four different assets: i) machinery, infrastructure  and equipment; ii) means of transport; iii) non residential construction; iv) housing.  
Based on our estimates, we find that Italy experienced important changes in capital  composition as economic development deepened. In the early stage, asset substitution took  place  mostly  from  construction,  in  particular  non  residential  structures, to  machinery  and  equipment, and to a lesser extent, to means of transport (Figure 5). Since the first decade of  the XXth century a housing upsurge began, against a continuing drop of the share of non  residential construction in total capital and a roughly stable profile of the other assets. This  pattern  changed  in the  late  Sixties,  since machinery,  equipment  and  means  of  transport  resumed a positive trend, which was offset by a declining share of housing as the downward  correction  of  non  residential  structures came  to  a  halt.  However, for  the  purpose  of  the  growth accounting exercise, we focus solely on productive assets, thus ruling out the housing  
sector from both the output and the input sides.  
Secondly,  following  Jorgenson  (2001)  we  estimated  the  rental  price  of  single  productive  assets  in  order  to control for the  possible  trend  in  the  quality  of  productive  services they  provide over time. For this purpose, for each asset i we have first computed the rental price  
uit 
14 
and then 
calculate 
d the changes in capital input as  
n 
                  
(8)               
kt 
vi,tsi,t 
with  
vi,t 
i 1 
a  Divisia i 
ndex :          
1 2 
uit 
, 1St 1 
uit 
, 1St 1 
u i , t 
St 
u i , t 
St 
where si is the log of the chained values of the net stock of asset type i (Si) and vit is the  
respective share on total returns to capital.. 
Rather than simply summing up net stocks of different assets, the Divisia index of  capital  input controls  for  the  possible  upgrading  in  the  quality  of  capital  as  it  implicitly  assigns relatively larger weights to changes in the more productive (or short-lasting) assets than to the less productive (or long-lasting) ones.15 
Thirdly ,  we computed the factor shares, filling the gap between 1861 and 1951, the  
data  are  available 
ed  a  series  of unit  wage s by aggregating all information available  
for single activities over different periods (again refer to the Data Appendix for the primary  
latter  being  the  purpose  we have 
first  year  construct 
for  which 
sources used). It turns out that the information gap prove an d for this period we have applied a simple interpolation. employment, we retrieved the  wage  and profit  one  under the usual assumption 
                                                  
s of constant returns to scale and perfect comp 
in  the  received  literature 
.  For  this  
d dramatic between 1940 and 1951,  
Based on unit wage s and total  share s in  total value added as the two  sum  to  
etition.  Our  
14 
Under the usual assumption that rental price does not vary across vintages of a capital asset i it is measured  
as  (7)   u 
i , t 
qit 
, 1rt 
qi,t 
i,t 
qi,t 
1 
qi,t 
, where  
qit is the market price of the productive asset i, rt is a  
measure of the opportunity cost that we proxy by the nominal long term interest rate on public bonds,  it is the  same depreciation rate adopted in estimating the capitalstock and the terms in brackets stand for the expected  revaluation of the asset, that we compute as a three-term moving average of the market price. 
15 
Due  to  data  limitations  on  wage  and  employment  composition  by  skill  or  education  level,  we  could  not  per form the same calculation for the labour input, which we continue to measure using our estimates of full 
time equivalent workers. 
- 
22 

========22========

data show that the profit share started off high in the immediate post-Unification years, at a  time when the capital-output and capital-labour ratios were low (Figure 6). Although with some fluctuations, particularly pronounced in war times, the profit share tended to stabilize  after the late 1890s at around half its original value. A further downward correction started in  the  early  1970s, that  was  temporarily,  and  only  partially, reversed over  the  1990s;  in  the  meantime, both the capital intensity of production and the ratio of capital to income have  shown a clear, positive trend.  
5.2       Aggregate TFP development in Italy 
Focusing on the total economy, and netting out housing rental services on the output  side  and  residential  stock  on  the input side due  to  their  negligible contribution to growth  potential, our results show that in the first twenty years of unified Italy capital accumulation  provided the highest contribution to GDP growth, partly thanks to a sizeable upgrading in the  quality of  productive  assets; employment creation  also contributed  to output growth, against the drag caused by a decline in TFP (Table 10). As the latter usually proxies both  disembodied technical progress and efficiency gains in the production process, its negative  development  could  signal  the  transitory  distress  due  to  the  revision  of organization  and  management practices in the face of the increasing migration of workers out of agriculture  and  the  expanding labour  force  (as  reported  in  Section  2.1).  Indeed  TFP  growth  gained  momentum thereafter and explained more than one third of total GDP growth in the years  from 1881 to 1911; at the same time, the contributions of both labour and capital levelled  off,  although accumulation  continued  to  provide the  biggest  contribution to  growth  (0.8  percentage points per year). Interestingly, in the sub-period 1901-1911, GDP grew at around  2.5% per year (figure not reported in Table 10) and, despite the strong employment creation,  labour productivity hit the highest growth since the unification of the country (1.8 per cent per  year),  spurred on by  both  capital  deepening  and  TFP growth (Figure 7). The positive  trends somewhat  strengthened  until the  demise  of  Giolitti  on  the  eve  of  WWI;  in  the  aftermath  of  the  war,  growth  of  GDP  and  TFP  resumed  robustly,  but  deteriorated  progressively as the Great Depression deepened and employment creation weakened (Figure 8). 
The era of the Italian boom, heralded in the years just following the end of WWII,  mirrored a brisk recovery  in both capital accumulation and, even more so, in TFP: in the years  1951-1973,  they provided  positive  contributions to  growth as  large  as 1.7 and 3.5 percentage  points,  respectively.  As  employment  creation  also  became  robust,  the  Italian  economy entered a rapid growth phase that was extraordinary in terms if both its intensity  and duration; even abstracting from the flourishing housing activities, GDP grew by 6.3 per  cent per year (7 per cent between 1951 and 1963). Labour productivity grew by almost 5 per  cent per year, benefiting from both higher capital deepening and  rapid improvement in TFP.     
As  the  catching  up  of  the  Italian  economy  was  rapidly  progressing  and  structural  bottlenecks began to show up, between the first oil shock and the crisis of the early 1990s GDP growth decelerated from 6.3 to 2.7 per cent; more disappointingly, the deceleration in  TFP  was  particularly  pronounced,  and  its  growth  rate more  than  halved,  down to 1.4 per  cent. Capital accumulation also lost momentum, but still explained almost one third of the  total  growth of  the  Italian  economy;  moreover,  capital  deepening, despite  its moderation,  continued  to  contribute  significantly  to  labour  productivity growth,  which  decelerated to  around 2 per cent per year mostly due to TFP dynamics.    
23 

========23========

Finally  signs  of a structural  weakness  of  the  Italian  economy  have become  more  severe since the middle of the 1990s, with particular reference to the dismal performance of TFP growth, which hit a low across the several periods we considered (0.3 per cent; 0.6 if  years since the start of the great contraction in 2008 are excluded). Compared with long-term  developments,  proxied  by  the  average  changes  over  the  full  period  since  1861,  in  recent  years the gap in GDP growth (1.1 per cent against 2.5) is almost completely explained by the  virtual stagnation of TFP, in addition to the slightly lower contribution coming from both  labour and capital inputs. The gap in labour productivity is less severe (0.5 per cent against  1.2),  as  capital  deepening  proceeded  in the latest  years  broadly at the  same  intensity  on  
average as in the full history of unified Italy. 
5.3        TFP growth in an international perspective 
We now set Italy‘s TFP growth rates in an international context. Due to the lack of  wage data throughout the period under study for all the countries in our selected sample, in  this section we  assume  factor  shares  to  be  fixed  at  0.65  for  labour and  0.35  for  capital.  Similar assumptions have already been made in cross-country studies (Broadberry and Gupta  2010; Carreras and Josephson 2010; Crafts and Toniolo 2010, just to mention some of the  most recent). Although criticism may be expected for this assumption, we are reassured by  the fact that studies such as Aiyar and Dalgaard (2005) find that a Cobb-Douglas production  function  with  a  constant  capital  share  of  one  third  is  a  very  good  approximation  of  more  general  production  functions  which  relax the  restrictive  neoclassical  assumptions.  Furthermore comparing our two estimates for Italy (variable vs. fixed shares) we do not see  striking differences in the main trends. We therefore proceed in this section with constant  shares and gauge the TFP growth rates for the total economy for Italy, the United Kingdom,  the United States, Germany and India, presented in Table 11, as well as GDP growth rates.16 
Apart  from  the  stagnation  in  the  first  twenty  years  after  unification,  
51-1973  period  again  stands  out  as  being  one  of  
4 per cent per ye 
regist er ed positive  TFP  growth.  The  19 exceptional TFP growth,  increasing by  in the sample in any period with the notabl (but recall that Japan has  
boom  years, it  is TFP  growth rather  potentially  pointing  to  a  more  sustainable  path 
not been included in the sample  
than input growth  
Italy  always  
ar, not equalled by any other country  e exception of Germany during the same years  
here) . Furthermore, in th e Italian  
that explains most of the GDP growth 
.  By  contrast,  during  the most  recent  years  
,  
Italy‘s  TFP  growth  has  been  very  low by  international  standards. Whereas  the  United  Kingdom and the United States never saw any particularly dramatic acceleration in their TFP  growth rates, Germany continued to display strong growth rates (of 2.3 per cent) even in the  two decades following its ‗economic miracle‘, growth rates which stabilized at 1.5 per cent  per  year  in  1990-2007.  The  less-developed  India again  shows  a  different  development  pattern with negative (or approximately zero) TFP growth rates, which only became positive  after 1950, and thereafter contributed to one third of overall growth until the year 2000. 
To  summarise,  what  we  see  is  Italy beginning to  catch-up  relative  to  the  United  Kingdom  after  the  former‘s  political  unification,  but with severe  set-backs across the  two  World Wars. The exceptional catch-up started only after 1945, but then TFP growth began to  lose momentum after 1973 and slowed down even further after 1993.  
                                                  
16 
Again,  for labour,  we use  the  HC  measure  for comparability reasons. Japan had to be  dropped from this  sample as data on capital stock are still under construction. 
24 

========24========

5.4         An overview of Italy’s TFP performance 
We can sum up section 5, by highlighting the following points: 
Italy‘s first period of technological change, roughly proxied by the Solow residual in  the standard growth accounting framework, was the 1881-1913 period. Its TFP growth rates  were similar in that period to those registered in the U.S. and Germany, revealing a catching  up process relative  to the  U.K. Capital  intensity  in  the  technique  of  production  kept increasing over this period, following the sizeable contribution of capital to growth in the  first two decades of political unification.  
The war and interwar years are difficult to interpret in a comparative perspective due  to problems with the data, but it is noteworthy that Italy‘s TFP growth rates slowed down  briskly during  the  1930s  relative  to  the  previous  1913-1929  period.  The  growth  rates  for  1929-1936 were also close to those registered in the U.S. and Germany.  
After WWII, TFP growth explains most of the exceptional GDP growth, as well as  labour productivity growth. Together with Germany, Italy represented a clear success story  in those years compared to the other countries in our sample.  
The deterioration in TFP growth rates in the most recent period is striking, even more  so if compared to Germany‘s performance in the same years. TFP changes explain labour  productivity growth to a lesser extent than capital intensity, scenario thus far never seen in  the Italian case with the exception of the early post-unification period .  
6.           Concluding Comments 
The paper has ended with a growth accounting exercise, which helps to shed light on  Italy‘s aggregate growth performance, both in terms of variations over time and comparisons  with other countries. Italian labour productivity growth was modest before World War II, so  that although a long period of decline was decisively reversed, there was little catching –up  on the leading economics of the time. This was largely the result of slow TFP growth before  World War I and inadequate capital formation during the interwar period. Rapid growth of  labour productivity at nearly 5 per cent per year was achieved during the Golden Age of the  1950s  and  1960s,  driven  primarily  by  TFP  growth,  although  there  was  also  a  strong  contribution  from  capital.  After  1973,  however,  Italy‘s  labour  productivity  growth  slowed  down, primarily as a result of slowing TFP growth, although the contribution of capital also  declined.  TFP  growth  thus seems  to  have  accounted  for  much  of  the  variation  in  Italy‘s  overall performance, both over time, and in comparison to other countries. To the extent that  TFP  growth  can  be  associated  with  innovation,  Italy  appears  to  have  become  highly  innovative during the Golden Age, but has become markedly less so since, particularly after  the early 1990s.  
However,  a  full  understanding  of  Italy‘s  productivity  performance  requires  a  consideration of sectoral developments. At this stage, without sectoral data on capital inputs,  the  sectoral  analysis  has  to  be  conducted  in  terms  of  labour  productivity  rather  than  total  factor productivity. Before World War II, although labour productivity growth was positive,  Italy made little headway in catching up on the United Kingdom, the European productivity  leader. Since the level of labour productivity in Italy was low at this time compared to the  UK,  particularly  in  agriculture  and  industry,  this  was  a  disappointing  performance  Italian  
25 

========25========

labour  productivity  growth  increased  dramatically  during  the  Golden  Age  of  1951-1973,  particularly in industry, as Italy caught up with the European productivity leaders.  A major  factor in the convergence process during this period was a structural shift of labour away  from  agriculture  towards  industry  and  services.  After  1973,  Italian  labour  productivity  growth  slowed  down.  To  some  extent  this  was  to  be  expected  as  Italy  approached  the  technological frontier. However, a sectoral analysis raises some concerns, particularly for the  post-1993  period.  A substantial  productivity  gap  remains  between  Italy  and  the  United  States, particularly in services, where Italy appear to have shared in the productivity bonus  from  the  application  of  information  and  communications  technologies  to  a  much  lesser  extent than other advanced countries. 
Finally,  it  would  be  appropriate  to  sound  a  note  of  caution  about  the  data.  The  analysis  presented  here  can  only  be  as  good  as  the  available  statistics,  and  imperfections  remain  despite  the  best  efforts  of  official  statisticians and  historical  researchers.  Nevertheless, we think it unlikely that revisions will overturn the basic findings  presented  here, particularly the slowness of Italian catching-up before World War II, the dramatically  improved productivity performance of Italy during the Golden Age of the 1950s and 1960s,  and the deterioration of Italy‘s performance since the early 1990s. 
26 

========26========

TABLE 1. Full-time equivalent labour shares in the Italian economy, 1861-2010 
(percentage shares) 
Year Agricultur 
s e 
1 
861 63.2 
1 
881 60.4 
1 
911 55.6 
1 
921 57.4 
1 
938 46.7 
1 
951 43.0 
1 
973 16.6 
1 
993 8.0 
2 5.3 010 % 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
Industry 
Services 
17.7 
19.1 
18.0 
21.6 
21.7 
22.8 
19.1 
23.5 
26.6 
26.6 
27.8 
29.2 
37.8 
45.7 
29.7 
62.3 
26.2 
68.4 
Note: The benchmark years chosen until 1951 coincide with 
selected census years. 
TABLE 2. Relationship between GDP per head and full-time equivalent labour shares 
in Italy, 1861-2010 
Sector 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
Dependent variable: GDP per head 
Estimated Coefficients Constant: 7.37 (0.00) 
Labour share: -1.08 (0.00) Constant: 12.23    (0.00) 
Labour share: 2.51 (0.00) 
Constant: 11.14    (0.00) 
Labour share: 2.19 (0.00) 
Source. See Data Appendix.  
R2 
0.9538 
0.6488 
0.9761 
Note: Variables are expressed in logs. The regressions were run by using OLS  with HAC standard errors. P-values are reported in brackets. 
27 

========27========

TABLE 3. Italy’s output per FTE worker and GDP per head growth rates, 1861-2010 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Years Agriculture 
1861-1881 0.2 
1881-1911 1.0 
1911-1938 0.7 
1938-1951 1.5 
1951-1973 4.4 
1973-1993 4.9 
1993-2010 2.6 Source: See Data Appendix.  
Industry 
0.4 
1.8 
0.5 
2.0 
5.0 
3.1 
0.6 
Services 
0.0 
1.4 -0.1 
1.5 
3.0 
0.6 
0.5 
Total Economy 
0.3 1.4 0.7 1.7 4.8 2.0 0.7 
GDP per head 
0.6 
1.0 
0.9 
2.2 
5.1 
2.3 
0.6 
Note: The benchmark years chosenuntil 1951 coincide with selected census years, for which estimates are more  
robust. 
TABLE 4. Labour productivity growth ratesin Italy: comparing alternative sources 
(percentage changes; yearlyaverage in periods) 
Years 
Maddison  (1991; 2003) 
1870-1913 1913-1929 1929-1938 1938-1951 1951-1973 1973-1992 
Our HC  data 
Rossi et al (1993) 
1.4 1.2 1.4 1.3 4.8 1.9 
0.9 0.9 0.8 2.5 5.9 2.0 
Our FTE  data 
- 0.1 1.6 1.1 4.6 2.0 
0.9 0.5 0.5 2.2 4.4 1.9 
Sources:  Maddison  (1991;  2003),  Rossi,  Sorgato  and  Toniolo (1993)  and  our  Data  
Appendix. 
Note: Benchmark years are those in Maddison (2003). 
28 

========28========

TABLE 5. Post-WWII labour productivity growth rates:  
VA per FTE worker and VA per hour worked 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Years 
1950-1973 1973-1995 1995-2007 
Our VA per  FTE worker  annual average  growth rates 
5.65 
2.34 
0.75 
Magnani and Crafts  (2011) VA per hour  
worked annual  average growth rates 
5.82 2.35 0.45 
Sources: our Data Appendix and Magnani and Crafts (2011). Note: Benchmark years are those reported in Magnani and Crafts  
(2011). 
TABLE 6. Italy’s industrial and services’ output per FTE worker growth rates, 1861-2010 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Manu- Years Mining facturing 1861-1881 -1.25 0.67 1881-1911 -0.99 2.35 1911-1938 -0.15 0.64 1938-1951 3.97 1.45 1951-1970 9.74 6.22 1970-1993 2.85 4.22 1993-2010 0.49 0.95 
Sources: See Data Appendix. 
Constr- uction -4.62 3.69 -4.15 3.16 0.54 1.07 -0.97 
Utilities -1.01 -6.74 7.66 -0.83 4.55 0.60 3.29 
Trade -0.12 2.84 -0.83 2.62 4.04 1.36 0.34 
Transport  
&  Communica 
-tion 
1.18 
0.64 
1.33 
2.00 
5.04 
2.55 
2.07 
Credit&  Insurance 
Personal  services 
Government  
services 
-0.48 2.34 1.28 -1.65 3.29 -1.63 1.73 
-0.64 4.43 0.02 0.17 4.00 -0.61 -0.85 
-0.66 1.51 -0.61 0.60 -0.87 0.59 0.55 
Note: The periodization differs slightly to that presented in Table 3 as two different datasets are here used for  VA, which respectively cover 1861-1970 and 1970-2010. 
29 

========29========

TABLE 7. Sectoral shares of employment (headcount), 1870-2007 
A. Italy 
Agriculture 
Industry 
1871 1911 1921 1931 1936 1951 1973 1993 2007 
68.1 59.1 59.1 53.8 52.0 44.3 17.7 6.6 4.2 
15.8 23.5 22.5 25.4 25.6 31.0 38.4 31.3 29.0 
C. United  States 
1870 
1910 
1920 
1930 
1940 
1950 
1973 
1990 
2005 
Agriculture 
Industry 
50.0 32.0 26.2 20.9 17.9 11.0 3.7 2.5 1.5 
24.8 31.8 33.2 30.2 31.6 32.9 28.9 21.8 16.7 
E. India 
Agriculture 
Industry 
1875 1910/1911 1929/30 1950/51 1970/1971 1999/0 
73.4 75.5 76.1 73.6 73.8 64.2 
14.5 10.3 9.1 10.2 11.1 13.9 
Sources: See Data Appendix.  
(percentage shares) 
Services 
16.2 17.4 18.4 20.8 22.5 24.8 43.9 62.2 66.8 
B. United  Kingdom 
1871 
1911 
1924 
1930 
1937 
1950 
1973 
1990 
2005 
Services 
25.2 36.2 40.6 48.9 50.5 56.1 67.4 75.7 81.8 
D.  Germany 
1871 
1913 
1925 
1930 
1935 
1950 
1973 
1990 
2005 
Services 
F. Japan 
12.1 14.2 14.8 16.2 15.1 21.9 
1891 1920 1950 1973 1990 2007 
1891 1920 1950 1973 1990 2007 
30 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
22.2 11.8 8.6 7.6 6.2 5.1 2.9 2.0 1.4 
42.4 44.1 46.5 43.7 44.5 46.5 41.8 28.5 18.4 
35.4 44.1 44.9 48.7 49.3 48.4 55.3 69.5 80.2 
Agriculture 
Industry 
Services 
49.5 34.5 31.5 30.5 29.9 24.3 7.2 3.4 2.1 
29.1 37.9 40.1 37.4 38.2 42.1 47.3 39.7 25.5 
21.4 27.6 28.4 32.1 31.9 33.6 45.5 56.9 72.4 
Agriculture 
Mining/ Manufact uring 
9.0 
16.2 
17.6 
27.3 
23.5 
17.4 
Construct 
ion 
75.8 55.4 48.3 16.0 9.2 5.1 
1.4 2.8 4.3 9.3 9.2 8.4 
Facilitating  Industry 
1.0 
3.6 
5.1 
6.3 
6.2 
6.4 
Services 
12.8 22.0 24.7 41.1 51.9 62.7 

========30========

TABLE 8. Output per worker (headcount) growth rates, 1870-2007 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
A. Italy 1861-1881 1881-1911 1911-1938 1938-1951 1951-1973 1973-1993 1993-2007 
Agriculture 
0.50 
0.76 
1.32 
1.92 
5.67 
6.41 
3.26 
Industry 
B. United  Kingdom 1861-1881 1881-1911 1911-1938 1938-1951 1951-1973 1973-1993 1993-2007 
Agriculture 
Industry 
0.96 0.15 1.74 2.71 5.01 2.96 2.59 
C. United States 
1869-1879 
1879-1909 
1909-1937 
1937-1950 
1950-1973 
1973-1990 
1990-2007 
Agriculture 
1.67 
0.81 
1.37 
3.98 
5.55 
4.40 
2.16 
Industry 
D. Germany 1871-1881 1881-1911 1911-1937 1937-1950 1950-1973 1973-1990 1990-2007 
Agriculture 
0.27 
1.33 
0.96 
-0.39 
6.32 
5.98 
4.11 
Industry 
E. India 1872/73-1900/01 1900/01-1946/47 1950/51-1970/71 1970/71-1999/00 
Agriculture 
0.4 
0.0 
0.9 
0.9 
Industry 
F. Japan Agricul- 
ture 
1891-1920 2.26 
1920-1950 
-0.39 
1950-1973 
1973-1990 
4.90 
2.34 
1990-2007 2.54 Source. See Data Appendix. 
Mining/ Manuf. 3.22 1.39 8.93 3.96 3.41 
Construction 
0.28 1.30 4.26 1.45 
-1.87 
-0.07 1.86 1.09 2.06 6.85 2.97 1.04 
Services -0.04 1.54 -0.08 1.63 3.84 0.47 0.15 
Total Economy 
0.37 
1.26 
1.24 
2.06 
6.21 
2.07 
0.58 
Services 
Total Economy 
1.75 0.48 1.87 0.91 1.99 2.98 2.04 
0.51 0.30 0.08 0.48 1.25 0.76 1.77 
1.25 0.43 0.95 0.79 2.50 1.83 1.83 
0.99 1.55 1.80 2.40 3.11 0.82 2.47 
Services 0.91 1.06 0.19 1.79 1.39 0.45 2.05 
Total Economy 
1.87 
1.37 
1.22 
2.38 
1.85 
0.43 
1.93 
1.47 1.74 0.91 0.07 4.93 1.96 3.87 
Services 0.45 0.99 0.54 -0.01 3.13 1.49 1.23 
Total Economy 
0.83 
1.61 
1.03 
0.10 
4.18 
1.80 
2.02 
1.1 1.4 3.4 2.7 
Services 
0.0 
1.0 
2.8 
2.3 
Total Economy 
0.4 
0.5 
1.9 
2.5 
Facilitating  Industry 
4.55 
-0.24 
7.70 
2.56 
1.44 
Services 
Total Economy 
0.32 1.00 3.08 1.93 0.85 
2.59 0.98 6.59 2.82 
1.47 
31 

========31========

TABLE 9. Comparative labour productivity levels by sector, 1870-2007 (UK=100) 
A. Italy 1871 1881 1901 1911 1921 1931 1936 1951 1963 1973 1993 2007 
Agriculture 
39.52 
40.84 
38.55 
42.37 
37.64 
36.46 
29.41 
30.08 
36.61 
34.51 
66.72 
73.09 
B. United  States 1869/71 1879/81 1889/91 1899/01 1909/11 1919/20 
1929 
1937 
1950 
1960 
1968 
1973 
1979 
1985 
1990 
2007 
Agriculture 
86.90 98.10 102.10 106.30 103.20 128.00 109.70 103.30 126.00 153.10 156.70 131.20 156.10 146.90 151.10 149.81 
C. Germany 
1871 
1881 
1891 
1901 
1911 
1925 
1929 
1935 
1937 
1950 
1960 
1968 
1973 
1979 
1985 
1990 
2007 
Agriculture 
55.7 
54.7 
53.7 
67.2 
67.3 
53.8 
56.9 
57.2 
59.0 
41.2 
47.8 
48.6 
50.8 
65.5 
62.1 
75.4 
103.1 
Industry 44.60 33.76 38.50 47.66 41.22 39.23 35.37 42.17 82.65 117.40 117.23 102.17 
Industry 
153.60 149.80 164.10 174.70 193.20 198.00 222.70 190.60 243.50 250.40 248.10 214.80 186.00 161.10 163.00 157.74 
Industry 91.7 93.7 99.3 105.0 127.7 92.3 97.1 99.1 96.9 91.8 117.9 121.9 121.1 132.8 114.8 111.0 135.1 
32 
Services 49.27 45.96 56.82 63.99 55.83 61.12 53.86 68.48 92.24 119.38 112.64 89.95 
Total Economy 
37.57 
34.97 
35.96 
41.27 
36.69 
39.54 
35.38 
46.48 
77.48 
101.64 
106.41 
89.62 
Services 
Total Economy 
85.90 87.90 84.20 104.00 107.40 118.90 121.20 120.00 140.80 137.70 139.60 137.40 137.20 134.10 129.60 136.53 
89.80 95.90 94.10 108.00 117.70 133.30 139.40 132.60 166.90 167.90 164.20 152.30 145.50 134.80 133.00 131.95 
Services 62.8 61.3 64.4 71.9 73.4 76.5 82.3 85.7 89.4 83.2 102.6 115.9 120.1 131.8 131.6 134.9 123.9 
Total Economy 
59.5 
57.3 
60.5 
68.4 
75.5 
69.0 
74.1 
75.7 
79.2 
74.4 
94.5 
107.1 
114.0 
126.5 
120.9 
125.4 
126.3 

========32========

D. India 1871/73 1881/83 1890/91 1900/01 1910/11 1920/21 1929/30 1935/36 1946/48 1950/51 1960/61 1970/71 1980/81 1990/91 1999/2000 
Agriculture 
11.2 
11.3 
10.4 
10.5 
11.1 
9.8 
8.3 
7.1 
7.0 
5.4 
4.3 
2.3 
1.6 
0.9 
1.0 
Industry 18.2 16.8 17.3 18.6 24.2 21.1 25.3 21.8 18.1 14.6 16.4 17.3 16.1 18.3 15.8 
Facilitating  Commerce- 
Services 18.1 15.9 15.6 15.6 17.7 21.1 25.2 23.2 23.5 17.5 20.0 22.6 29.3 33.0 32.8 
Total Economy 
15.0 
14.1 
13.8 
13.2 
14.4 
13.4 
14.2 
12.8 
11.7 
9.3 
9.7 
8.9 
10.2 
11.0 
11.4 
Total Economy 
E. Japan 
1891 
20.5 
1901 
24.7 
1911 
27.8 
1920 
29.7 
1929 
28.0 
1935 
25.2 
1950 
15.5 
1960 
18.9 
1973 
15.1 
1979 
13.2 
1990 
12.7 
1997 
14.2 
2007 
13.4 Sources: See Data Appendix.  
Agriculture Mining/Manuf Construction 
14.0 
16.6 
20.5 
30.9 
35.5 
35.9 
25.4 
46.6 
86.8 
98.1 
94.6 
89.0 
96.2 
75.0 64.7 94.0 74.4 59.3 89.8 75.1 109.4 147.3 156.4 162.8 92.9 94.5 
Industry 32.4 50.8 65.5 95.9 121.0 124.2 49.2 80.7 109.2 107.7 108.5 79.6 65.9 
33 
Services 33.5 36.6 33.5 31.9 33.1 30.5 46.1 45.2 76.4 83.7 97.9 95.0 88.1 
16.5 19.7 22.5 29.1 31.6 32.0 28.8 43.6 75.5 83.9 92.4 86.2 84.9 

========33========

TABLE 10. The sources of growth of the Italian economy, 1861-2010 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Years 
Changes  Contribution  Contribution  
in GDP 
of labour  
1861-1881 1881-1911 1911-1938 1938-1951 1951-1973 1973-1993 1993-2010 
1.34 1.83 1.65 3.10 6.30 2.74 1.05 
0.61 0.32 0.63 0.28 1.11 0.45 0.24 
1861-2010 
2.46 
0.50 
Source. See Data Appendix.  
of capital  services 
of which  
asset  substitution 
Changes in  
TFP  
1.14 0.82 -0.93 0.76 1.70 0.89 0.55 
0.38 0.12 -0.13 0.19 0.03 0.06 0.06 
-0.41 0.68 1.95 2.05 3.49 1.40 0.26 
0.81 
0.08 
1.16 
Note: GDP and capital here exclude the housing sector. 
TABLE 11. GDP and TFP growth in a sample of countries 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
A. Italy 1861-1881 1881-1911 1911-1938 1929-38 1938-1951 1951-1973 1973-1993 1993-2007 
GDP 1.3 1.7 1.7 1.5 3.1 5.8 2.6 1.6 
TFP 0.0 0.6 1.2 0.6 2.6 4.0 1.4 0.3 
C. United States 
1869-1889 
1889-1909 
1909-1950 
1929-1937 
1950-1973 
1973-1990 
1990-2007 
GDP 4.3 4.2 3.0 0.6 3.6 1.5 3.1 
TFP 0.0 0.8 1.3 0.3 1.4 0.0 0.9 
E. India GDP 1890/91 to 1900/01 0.4 1900/01 to 1946/47 0.9 1950/51 to 1970/71 3.8 1970/71 to 1999/00 4.8 Source. See Data Appendix.  
TFP -0.7 0.0 1.2 1.5 
B. United Kingdom 
1871-1891 
1891-1911 
1911-1950 
1929-1937 
1950-1973 
1973-1990 
1990-2007 
GDP 1.8 1.7 1.3 2.3 2.7 1.1 2.6 
TFP 0.6 0.3 0.6 1.1 1.2 0.3 0.7 
D. Germany 1871-1891 1891-1911 1911-1950 1929-1935 1950-1973 1973-1990 1990-2007 
GDP 2.4 2.1 -0.3 0.1 5.4 4.6 0.6 
TFP 0.7 0.8 0.6 0.7 7.0 2.3 1.5 
Note: For international comparability reasons, in this Table we assume factor shares to be fixed at 0.65 for  labour and 0.35 for capital. GDP and capital here include the housing sector. 
34 

========34========

FIGURE 1. Italy’s labour force: total workers (headcount) 
and full-time equivalent (FTE) workers, 1861-2010 
20,000,000 
18,000,000 
16,000,000 
14,000,000 
Agriculture Industry Services FTEAgriculture FTEIndustry FTEServices 
12,000,000 
10,000,000 
8,000,000 
6,000,000 
4,000,000 
2,000,000 
Number of workers (headcount) and of full-time-equivalent workers  
0 
1861 
1871 
1881 
1891 
1901 
1911 
1921 
1931 
1941 
1951 
1961 
1971 
1981 
1991 
2001 
Years 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
35 

========35========

FIGURE 2. Shift-share analysis of Italy’s labour productivity growth rates, 1861-2010 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Internal productivity growth 
Structural Change 
7.00% 
6.00% 
5.00% 
4.00% 
3.00% 
2.00% 
1.00% 
0.00% 
1861-1881 
1881-1913 
1913-1945 
1945-1973 
1973-1993 
1993-2010 
1861-2010 
Growth rates (% per year) 
-1.00% 
-2.00% 
Years 
Source: See Data Appendix.  
Note: This analysis is the result of a shift-share exercise, modified as in equation (5). 
36 

========36========

FIGURE 3. Sectoral labour shares within Italy’s industry, 1861-2010 
(percentage shares) 
Mining 
Manufacturing 
Sectoral shares of FTE workers 
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 
0% 
1861 
1881 
1911 
1921 
   Source: See Data Appendix.  
Construction 
Utilities 
1936 
1951 
1973 
1993 
2010 
Years 
FIGURE 4. Sectoral labour shares within Italy’s services, 1861-2010 
(percentage shares) 
Trade 
Credit & InsuranceGovernment services 
Sectoral shares of FTE workers 
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 
0% 
1861 
1881 
1911 
1921 
Source: See Data Appendix.  
Transport & Communications Personal services 
1936 
1951 
1973 
1993 
2010 
Years 
37 

========37========

FIGURE 5. Composition of net stock of capital in Italy, 1861-2010. 
(chained values; percentages of total stock) 
80 
Machinery and equipment 
70 
Means of transport ------------ 
Residential Construction 
60 
Non residential Construction 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
1861 1871 1881 1891 1901 1911 1921 1931 1941 1951 1961 1971 1981 1991 2001 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
38 

========38========

FIGURE 6. Profit shares and the capital input in Italy, 1861-2010 
(in non housing economy)  
0.6 
3.5 
0.5 
Capital to labour (FTE account) ratio   Capital share of value added Capital to value added ratio (rhs) 
3 
2.5 
0.4 
2 
0.3 
1.5 
0.2 
1 
0.1 
0.5 
0.0 
0 
1861 
1867 
1873 
1879 
1885 
1891 
1897 
1903 
1909 
1915 
1921 
1927 
1933 
1939 
1945 
1951 
1957 
1963 
1969 
1975 
1981 
1987 
1993 
1999 
2005 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
FIGURE 7. The contribution of TFP and capital deepening to labour productivity dynamics 
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
Capital Deepening 
Changes in TFP 
5.00 
4.00 
3.00 
2.00 
1.00 
growth rates (% changes) 
0.00 
1861-1881 1881-1911 
1911-1938 1938-1951 
1951-1973 1973-1993 1993-2010 
1861-2010 
GDP per FTE worker average annual  
-1.00 
Years 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
39 

========39========

FIGURE 8. TFP and GDP developments in Italy in selected periods  
(percentage changes; yearly average in periods) 
6 
5 
4 
4 
3 
2 
2 
1 
0 
0 
-2 
-1 
-4 
-2 
GDP 
TFP 
GDP 
TFP 
-3 
-6 
-4 
-8 
1861 
1863 
1865 
1867 
1869 
1871 
1873 
1875 
1877 
1879 
1881 
-5 1881 
1884 
1887 
1890 
1893 
1896 
1899 
1902 
1905 
1908 
1911 
12 
GDP 
TFP 
10 
10 
9 
GDP 
TFP 
8 
8 
6 
7 
4 
6 
2 
5 
4 
0 
3 
-2 
2 
-4 
1 
-6 
0 
1911 
1914 
1917 
1920 
1923 
1926 
1929 
1932 
1935 
1938 
1951 
1953 
1955 
1957 
1959 
1961 
1963 
1965 
1967 
1969 
1971 
1973 
8 
4 
7 
GDP 
TFP 
3 
GDP 
TFP 
6 
2 
5 
1 
4 
0 
3 
-1 
2 
1 
-2 
0 
-3 
-1 
-4 
-2 
-5 
-3 
-6 
1973 
1975 
1977 
1979 
1981 
1983 
1985 
1987 
1989 
1991 
1993 
1993 
1995 
1997 
1999 
2001 
2003 
2005 
2007 
2009 
Source: See Data Appendix. 
40 

========40========

A. Data Appendix 
I. Italy 
I.1          Output And Population  
The value added estimates for the three sectors agriculture, industry and services, as well as  GDP,  are new estimates  provided  by  the  Banca  d‘Italia-ISTAT-Università  di  Roma  Tor  Vergata  research  group (Baffigi  2011).  They  adopt  a  pre-ESA  (1965)  ISTAT  classification  which  is  consistent  with  our  labour  estimates.  Value  added  in  services  and  the  total  economy  has  been  calculated net of value added in housing for consistency reasons with input data. Data are at current  boundaries. 
Population data are also from Baffigi (2011) and are at current boundaries. 
I.2            Labour20 
We here explain the methodology underlying our reconstruction of both the total number of  workers (headcount, HC) and the number of full-time equivalent (FTE) workers in Italy at current  boundaries, from 1861 through to 2010, at a 10-sector level of disaggregation (agriculture, mining,  manufacturing,  public  utilities,  construction,  trade,  transport  and  communication,  credit  and  insurance, private services, government services). 
A. Number of workers per sector  
A.1 Census years (1861-1951) 
Official and systematic monthly surveys on employment were introduced in Italy only in the  early 1950s. A long-run perspective covering the first century of unified Italy‘s history hence has to  rely on mainly two sources for labour input: population censuses (from hereon PCs) and industrial  censuses (ICs). The former censuses (taken in  1861, 1871, 1881, 1901, 1911, 1921, 1931, 1936,  1951) give us a measure of the active population, which includes, as well as full-time labourers,  also  part-time  workers,  self-employed,  and  the  (temporarily)  unemployed.  Conversely,  ICs  (conducted in 1911, 1927, 1937-1939, 1951) provide figures concerning only the employed workers  (addetti) in  industrial  firms  at  the  time  of  the  survey,  hence  generally  not  including  seasonal  labourers,  workers  involved  in  cottage  industry,  etc.  Therefore,  if  PCs  overstate  the number  of  engaged persons, ICs underestimate it. 
Vitali (1970)‘s seminal work in making the PCs comparable over time was later marginally  revised and extended by Zamagni (1987) and Fuà and Scuppa (1988). However, all these studies  begin with the 1881 census: the 1861 and 1871 ones were discarded due to ―their dubious reliability  and scarce detail, both at sector and regional level‖ (Vitali 1970, p. 3). Zamagni is less pessimistic  (―I  think  that  something  could  be  done  at  least  with  the  1871  census  to  link  it  with  later  ones‖,  Zamagni 1987, p. 211). Scholars such as Fenoaltea have used the unrevised data from the 1871, and  even the 1861, PCs in their studies. Federico and Malanima (2004) too use data from the first two  PCs on labour-force in agriculture, revised to take into account the underestimation of the female  workforce in the original census data. But to our knowledge no systematic attempt at linking these  two PCs to  the  following,  for  all  sectors, has  yet  been  made.21 A  harmonisation  of  all  ICs  was  instead attempted by Chiaventi (1987), Cainelli and Stampini (2002) and Federico (2003) . 
                                                  
20 
For a  more  detailed note on labour input,  please  contact  the  authors. For this  section,  we  gratefully acknowledge  useful  comments  by  Federico  Barbiellini  Amidei,  Emanuele  Felice  and  Ferdinando  Giugliano  on  the  historical  data  used,  as  well  as  conversations  with  Magda  Bianco,  Domenico  De  Palo,  Maura  Francese  and  Roberta  Zizza,  for  clarifications  on  more  recent  data  sources.  We  are  grateful  to  Gianni  Toniolo  for  his  precious  encouragement  and  suggestions. We also heartily thank Giovanni Federico and Roberto Golinelli for sharing their data with us. 
21 
Daniele and Malanima (2009) include the first two PCs in their reconstruction of labour supply in benchmark years,  
but  operate  at  regional,  rather  than  sectoral  level,  si nce  their  analysis  stops  at  a  three -level  sectoral  breakdown  
41 

========41========

Our contribution here is first of all that of linking the first two PCs of the Italian Kingdom to  the following ones revised by Vitali (1970) and Zamagni (1987). Similarly to the latter studies, the  benchmark economic classification of sectors by  us adopted is that of 1961. Table A1 illustrates  how we conducted the reclassification of activities for the 1861 and 1871 PCs.  
The next decision to take was how to handle the issue of military recruits in the PC data.  Until  the  1936  PC,  in  fact,  military  recruits  were  counted  as  workers  in  government  services, a  sector  which  was  therefore  over-estimated.  To  tackle  this  problem,  we  first  found  data  on  the  number  of  recruits  and  of  ―permanent‖  soldiers  in 1861  and  in 1871  (respectively from Ufficio  dell‘Italia  Militare and Istat,  Annuario  Statistico  Italiano).  Next,  following  Vitali  (1970),  we  assumed that ―permanent‖ soldiers had no reason to deny being part of the army when filling in the  census form; the problem was, rather, that of temporary recruits declaring that their profession was  in PA. Hence, by subtracting the ―permanent‖ soldiers from the census army figure, we obtained the  number of military recruits who declared their profession was in the army instead of that of origin;  these  persons  thus  had  to  be  redistributed  across  sectors.  We  therefore  implemented  the  redistribution, according to the weight each sector had relative to the total active population of the  sectors in which the recruits could have worked, as in Vitali (1970: 270). To maintain comparability  with Vitali, in fact, we assumed that no recruits were active in the utilities, credit and insurance,  
personal services and PA sectors.22 
less  than  ten  in  the  PCs 
The next step concerned addressing the problem of the inclusion of working children aged  
until  1901.  In  1881  and  1901  only  children  of  nine  years  of  age  were  counted, whilst in 1871 (and 1861) children of all ages were included. We assumed the lower bound  of working children was eight years in order to implement our further revisions of the d 
furthermore ass equation held: (1) 
umed, similarly to Vitali (1970, p. 
209), that, in each sector, in 1871, the f 
ata. 
23 
We  ollowing  
(Number of TOTAL 8 and 9 year olds)/(Number of TOTAL 8-15 year olds) =  
(Number of ACTIVE 8 and 9 year olds)/(Number of ACTIVE 8-15 year olds) 
The  resulting  number  of  working  eight  and  nine  year  olds was  netted  out  proportionally  from  all  sectors.  Exceptions  were  the  extractive  and    utilities  industry  and  credit  and  insurance  sectors, in which no child of less than ten years of age was assumed to work.24 
A specific issue arises for the manufacturing sector in the early PCs.  Zamagni (1987), in  
fact, pointed out how the number of workers in the textile industries in 1881, 1901 and 1911 were  
production of textiles by women, when the latter  
over -estimated due to the inclusion of domestic was actually directed to self 
                                                                                  
-consumption, rather than to the market. This problem also concerned  
                                         
                                         
(agriculture, industry, services). Furthermore, apart from the issue of boundary changes, it is also not clear what other  revisions Daniele and Malanima conducted on the 1861 and 1871 PCs (Daniele and Malanima, 2009, p. 23). 
22 
Vitali (1970, p. 270) justifies this assumption by stating ―Such an assumption may appear at a first glance quite rigid,  however it finds a consistent justification when considering the periods considered in this reconstruction‖. We can add  some more precise explanations. A law of 1854 (20 March 1854, No. 1676), for example, forbade clerics from being  called up to the army. The same exemption was made for ―justice executors‖ (esecutori della giustizia). Both of these  classes of workers fell into the private services sector. Another assumption is that other sectors, such as PA and credit,  on average employed older people compared to the labourers working in agriculture and industry. As 20 year olds were  recruited, there was a higher probability of them previously working in the primary and secondary sector, rather than in  some tertiary sectors.  This  assumption  can  only – partially – be  verified  for  the  1861  census  data,  in  which  the  population was classified simultaneously by profession and by age group (0-15; 15-30; 30-60; over 60), but not for the  1871 census where figures concerning the 0-15 cohort are provided, but not any others. 
23 
Vitali  (1970,  p.  216)  suggested  this  as  a  possible  assumption  if  wanting  to  use  the  1871  censu 
purposes. 
s  for  comparative  
24 
Vitali (1970, p. 213) made this assumption for the latter two sectors. We also added the extractive industry, since a  
law of 1859  
forbade 
children under 10 years of age from working in mines. 
42 

========42========

the first two PCs: in the 1871 one, for example, a caveat appears concerning the women employed  in  the  textile  industry,  who  ―may  be  on  the  whole  overestimated‖  (Statistica  del  Regno  d‘Italia  1871,  p. IV).  In  order  to  tackle  this  overestimation  issue,  Zamagni  (1987,  p. 38)  produced  an  estimate of the industrial labour-force in textiles by replacing the PC figure for 1881 with 110% of  the corresponding figure in Ellena (1880) found for 1876.25 Zamagni‘s choice of using 110% of the  closest  industrial  census  figure  allows  ―for  some  ‗physiological‘  discrepancy‖;  no  further  justification was given. For the 1871 census,Ellena‘s data are again the closest in time. For 1871,  we thus use 90% of the 1876 figure, reclassified according to the 1961 scheme, in order to allow for  a  symmetrical  ―physiological  discrepancy‖ – and  mainly  to  retain  comparability  with  Zamagni‘s (1987) revisions – in the textile industry, in this way replacing the figure derived from the 1871 PC.  For  1861,  having  no  (partial)  IC  in  nearby  years  to  draw  upon,  we  assumed  the  downward  correction to be made to be of the same magnitude as the one made for 1871 (i.e. 28%). 
Finally, PC data had to be adjusted for boundary changes. Roughly speaking, in 1871 Italy  was  missing  the  current  Trentino  Alto  Adige  and  Friuli  Venezia  Giulia  regions.  Elaborating  on  Vitali (1980)‘s data, we derived his estimates of active population in the two regions per sector in  1881; we assumed that the ratio of active population in the two regions per sector to total active  population per sector in Italy (excluding the two regions) was constant in 1871 and 1881, and we  hence derived the active population in the two regions per sector in 1871. The same assumption was  made for Rome, annexed in 1871, and hence included in the 1871 PC, but not in the 1861 one. 
A.2 Inter-census years (1861-1951) 
Our  next  contribution  was  to  estimate  the  number  of  workers  in  Italy  in  the  inter-census  years. To do this, one or more indicators of employment available from different sources were used  to interpolate the data relative to the benchmark census  years. This methodology was adopted in  Rossi, Sorgato and Toniolo (1993); we however use different, and a larger number of indicators.  Furthermore, well aware of the dangers behind extrapolating the cycle from elementary series and  then extending it to the corresponding aggregate sectors,26 we were careful in ch oosing indicators  referring  to  ―significant‖  sub-sectors,  which  reasonably  could  represent  the  dynamics  of  the  aggregate ones. For example, the mining and quarrying series accounted for 97-100% of the overall  extractive industry; the State PA workers for similar percentages of the overall government services  sector. The three elementary series used for transport and communication accounted for around 65- 70% of the sector. The coverage of the manufacturing sector was unfortunately lower (30-40%), but  still  higher  than  that  in  Rossi,  Sorgato  and  Toniolo;  furthermore,  the  sub-sectors  considered  (metallurgy, mechanics, chemical industry) presumably had a more stable cycle compared to other,  more volatile, sub-sectors. In the sub-periods in which no indicators were found, linear interpolation  was used. 
In particular, for the industrial sector, the following indicators were employed(if otherwise  not specified, the indicators were taken from Istat, Annuario Statistico Italiano, various years): 
Extractive. Miners, for the years 1870-1902 and 1906-1938; quarry-workers, for the years  1890-1897, 1901-1902 and 1906-1938. 
Manufacturing. Total metalworkers, for the years 1909-1938; workers in the iron and steel  industry  for  1881-1884  and  1887-1902;  workers  in  the  pig-iron,  copper,  lead,  silver,  gold,  antimony  and    fossil  fuel  industries  for  the  period  1887-1902;  total  workers  in  metallurgy  and  minerals for the period 1920-1938;  workers in the mercury and sulphur industries for the years  
                                                  
25 
Ellena  (1880)  provides  a  survey conducted  on  a  limited  number  of  industrial  sectors,  excluding  the  metallurgy,  mechanics,  glass,  ceramics,  chemical  and  mining  industries.  It  only  included  employed  workers  at  the  time  of  the  survey and did not consider domestic production. 
26 
See, for exam ple, Fenoaltea (2006, p. 67). 
43 

========43========

1895-1902; workers in the asphalt, bitumen and oil industries for the period 1890-1902; workers  in the chemical industry for the years 1893-1902 and 1906-1914, and then from 1927 to 1938;  workers in the tobacco industry for the period 1906-1914; workers in the wood industry for the  period  1927-1938;  workers  in  the  paper  industry  for  the  period  1920-1938;  workers  in  the  clothing  and  leather  industry  for  the  period  1920-1938;  workers  in  the  textile  industry  for  the  period 1920-1938 (data for the last five branches are taken from Assonime, various years, Banca  d‘Italia 1938 and Ministero delle Corporazioni, various years); workers subject to legislation on  child and female labour and industrial accidents for the years 1906-1916. 
Construction. Total workers in the construction industry for the years 1922-1938 (Assonime,  various years, Banca d‘Italia 1938 and Ministero delle Corporazioni, various years). 
Utilities. Total workers in the gas and water industry for the years 1929-1938 (Assonime,  various years, Banca d‘Italia 1938 and Ministero delle Corporazioni, various years). 
For the services sector, the following indicators were used: 
Transport and communications. Men employed in the merchant marine for the years 1865- 1916  and  1921-1925;  telegraph  employees  from  1861  to  1881;  telegraph,  post  and  telephone  employees for the period 1910-1921; employees of the national railway company (Ferrovie dello  Stato) for the years 1880-1884, 1888-1890, 1893-1940.  
Credit and insurance. Bank of Italy employees from 1894 to 1935 (Contessa and De Mattia 27 
1993). 
PA. Employees of State public administrations from 1926 to 1951 (ISTAT 2008: 137). 
Trade, as well as personal services, were linearly interpolated. 
Finally, the series on agriculture, forestry and fishing was obtained by linearly interpolating the  PC data.28 
A3. Number of engaged workers  (1951-2010) 
Having constructed the series of Italy‘s workers in 10 sectors from 1861 to 1951, we then  proceeded to link the series up to other sources for the period 1951-2010. From 1951 to 1970, the  employment series underlying Golinelli and Monterastelli (1990)29 was used to derive the dynamics  of  employment  for  that  period,  with  the  1951  PC  and  the  official  ISTAT  data  for  1970  as  
constraints. From 1970 onwards, official ISTAT national accounts figures were used, reclassified 
according to the 1961 benchmark economic classification. 
30 
                                                  
27 
From its institution in 1893 until 1926, the Bank of Italy was one of three banks of issue in Italy, which could offer  services to private agents, in competition with the other commercial banks. From 1926 and 1936 it was thesole issuing  bank but only with the 1936 Bank Act did it become a true ―bank of banks‖. Until then it may be considered a credit  institution,  although  it  was  subjected  to  legislative  constraints  by  the  1893  Issuing  Bank  Act,  at  a  competitive  disadvantage with respect to the other banks (commercial banks were, in fact, regulated for the first time only in 1936).  Thus said, the changes in the number of the Bank of Italy‘s employees may be an indicator of employment of the credit  sector as a whole. 
28 
Linear i nterpolation in thi s sector was also used by Rossi, Sorgato and Toniolo  (1993) and Federico and Malanima  
(2004). 
29 
The primary source was ISTAT (1973). 
30 
In particular, the breakdown between private services and PA from the official ISTAT data was obtained by applying  the annual share of market vs. non -market sector employees from Golinelli (1998) to the health, insurance and ―other‖  services data for the period 1970-1997. For the years 1999-2009, data from Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (various  years) on public sector workers were used to achieve the breakdown. The shares used to disaggregate employment data  were also used to disaggregate the ISTAT value added data. 
44 

========44========

B. Number of full-time equivalent workers per sector  
To  our  knowledge,  Rossi,  Sorgato  and  Toniolo  (1993)  is  the  only  existing  attempt  to  construct historical long-run series of full-time equivalent (FTE) employment, in particular for the  period 1911-1951, disaggregated by sector (agriculture; industry; services; PA), then linked up to  the 1951-1990 series of ―standard units of labour‖ published in Golinelli and Monterastelli (1990).  Following a similar methodology, we constructed series of fully employed equivalents in ten sectors  (agriculture,  mining,  manufacturing,  public  utilities,  construction,  trade,  transport  and  communications, credit and insurance, private services, government services) for th e overall period  1861-2010. 
B1. Agriculture 
Estimating  FTE employment  series  in  agriculture  is  a  particularly  important  issue.  For  economies with less refined divisions of labour, such as Italy, estimates based on the size of the  workforce recorded in PCs  as engaged in agriculture, in fact, are likely to be overstated, since the  criterion used was to classify individuals according to their main occupation. Moreover, massive  underemployment of men, women and children was a predominant feature in this sector  for at least  a  century  of  Italy‘s unified history.  Historical  evidence  has  furthermore  shown  that  involuntary  unemployment was higher amongst landless day labourers ( braccianti), relative to labourers who  instead owned or rented the land they cultivated (S erpieri 1910; INEA 1933; Medici and Orlando  1951).  The  present  issues have been  tackled  by  O‘Brien  and  Toniolo  (1991).  Following  their  methodology,  we  have  here  transformed  labour  force  figures  at  all PC  dates  (1861,  1871,  1881,  1901, 1911, 1921, 1931, 1936 and 1951) into fully  employed male equivalents and then linearly  interpolated the census years. In particular, the following assumptions were made:  a) male farmers  aged 15-65 (i.e. owner-occupiers, tenants, share-croppers) worked for 230 days a year; b) landless  male labourers aged 15-65 worked 104 days a  year; c) females, children and elderly adults aged  over  65  worked  104  days  a  year,  regardless  of  their  status.31 Furthermore ,  we  assumed females,  children and elderly males  worked on average  less as they diverted more of their potential working  
time to leisure or household tasks , as  report ed in Table A2 . 
B2. Industry and Services 
For industry and services, we instead used the information contained in ICs to specify full- time  workers,  as  in  Rossi,  Sorgato  and  Toniolo  (1993).  We  thus  interpolated,  by  means  of  the  indicators  described  in  Section  A2,  the  employment  figures  found  in  the  ICs,  after  having  aptly  reclassified them, and adjusted them to current boundaries.  
In particular, in the four industrial sectors, employment figures at industrial census dates for  1911,  1927,  1937-39  and  1951  – reclassified  according  to  the  1961  classification and  made  comparable by Federico (2003), and here converted into series at current boundaries – were used as  benchmark  years.32 The  ratio  IC 
1911/PC1911 
was  used  to  rescale  the  PC  data  for  the  period  1861- 
                                                  
31 
The number of estimated days worked by each category of agricultural labourers are the same as those in Rossi and  Toniolo (1992) and Rossi, Sorgato and Toniolo (1993), which are lower than those used in O‘Brien and Toniolo (1991,  p.398),  where  ―for  current  purposes  it  was  appropriate  to  select  published  figures  which  represented  upper-bound  figures of the days actually worked by farmers, labourers, and their families in agriculture for 1911 in order to bias the  calculation against Italy‖. Female labourers aged over 65 were eliminated from the sample by the previous papers; we  instead included them, as we found no reason to the contrary, weighting them downward accordingly. However, if this  category  only  accounted  for  1-2%  of  the  total  active  labour  force  in  the  PC  years,  it  dropped  even  further  to  approximately 0.5% of  full-time  male equivalent estimates: the  effect of such an inclusion is thus  minimal. Finally,  another difference with respect to O‘Brien and Toniolo, was the source used for our computations. Whereas O‘Brien  and Toniolo relied on data from Vitali‘s first study on agriculture (Vitali 1968) for their 1911 benchmark, we built on  Vitali‘s revised agriculture estimates (Vitali 1970). 
32 
The effect of the change in boundaries in the period 1911 -1951 was estimated as the following: the areas added to  
Italy after WWI accounted in 1927 for  3.8% of total employment and the areas subtracted after WWII accounted in  
45 

========45========

1910, for which no ICs were taken.  We proceeded in the same manner also for four service sectors,  with the only difference that the first services census was in 1927. For PA, not included in the ICs,  we used the series from ISTAT (2008). 
The series thus obtained were then linked up to Golinelli (1997) and ISTAT official national  accounts  (2011)  data  on  ―standard  units  of  labour‖,  after  having  reclassified  them  accordingly.  Again, in the case of  1951-1970, the 1951 IC data and the official ISTAT data for 1970 were used  as constraints, and were linked via interpolation by means of Golinelli‘s series. 
Our complete series (1861-2010), of number of workers and of FTE workers, broken down  by ten sectors are presented in Table A3. 
                                                                                                                                                                    1951  for  1.7%  of  total  employment  (Zamagni  1981,  p.43).  These  adjustments  were  made  – proportionally – to  all  sectors. Both Chiaventi and Zamagni refer to the 1951 economic classification.  
46 

========46========

TABLE A1. Table of conversion for the 1871 and 1861 population censuses 
Sectors 
1961  census  
1871 census classification 
Agriculture,  forestry, hunting  & fishing 
classification 1.00 
I (EXCEPT Ie1-Ie2-Ig); XVI2 
Extractive 
2.00 
Ig; XVI11; IIp5 (1%) -VI1 (2%) 
Manufacturing 
3.00 
from IIa1 to IIa3; from IIa5 to IIa9; from  IIa11 to IIa16; from IIa18 to IIa31; IIb2; from  IIc1 to IIc5; fromIIc7 to IIc14; IIe2-IIe3;  from IIe4 to IIe6 (5%); IIe10-IIe11; IIe8 +  IIe13 + IIe14 (11%); IIe20; from IIe22 to  IIe26; IIe30; IIe33; from IIf3 to IIf6; IIf12- IIf13; IIf15; IIg; IIh; IIi; IIj; IIk; IIL; IIm  (EXCEPT IIm4); IIn (EXCEPT IIn6); from  IIo2 to IIo4; IIo6-II07; IIp1 to IIp3; IIq; IIr  (EXCEPT IIr11); from IIs1 to IIs4; XIIIa4;  XIVa2 (50%); IIp5 (30%) -VI1 (63%);  
XVI10 (60%) 
Construction 
4.00 
IIf1-IIf2; IIf8 + XVI6 (50%); IIf9 (50%);  
IIf10-IIf11; IIf14; XVI3 
Utilities 
5.00 
IIf9 (50%); IIs5; IIp5 (0.1%)-VI1 (0.2%) 
Trade 
6.00 
Transport &  Communications 
7.00 
IIa4-IIa10-IIa17; IIb1; IIc6; IIe1-IIe7-IIe9- IIe12; from IIe4 to IIe6 (95%) ; IIe8 + IIe13 +  IIe14 (89%); from IIe15 to IIe19; IIe21; IIe27  (65%); IIe28-IIe29-IIe31-IIe32-IIe34-IIe35;  IIf7; IIm4; IIo1-IIo5-IIo8-IIo9; IIr11; III4;  III6 (70%); III7-III8; III9 (70%); III11-III12  (90%); from III13 to III18; IVa6; IVc; from  VI3 to VI5; XI9-XI10; XIIIa9; XV3-XV4; XVI1-XVI4-XVI7-XVI8 
III6 (30%); III9 (30%); III19; Iva (EXCEPT  IVa6); Ivb; VI2; XVI10 (40%) 
Credit and  Insurance 
8.00 
from III1 to III3 III10 VI1 (15%) 
Private services 
1861 census classification 
Ia; Ib; Ic (41%) 
IIa 
Ic (50%); IIb; IIIa-IIIb-IIId-IIIe- IIIf-IIIg-IIIh; IIIi (5%); IIIj  (86%); Vh 
IIIc; IIIj(0.4%) 
IIIj (0.02%) 
IIIi (95%); IIIj (13%); Iva; Ivb  (84%) 
IVb(16%); IVc 
Vi (1%) 
Ic (9%); Va-Vb (80%); Vc  (60%); Vg (22%); Vd-Ve-Vf; Vi  
9.00 
Ie1-Ie2; IIc15-IIc16; IId1-IId2; IIe27 (35%);  
IIf8 +XVI6 (50%); IIf16; IIn6; IIp4; IIp5  
(70%); IIs6; III5; III11-III12 (10%); VI1  
(20%); from VI6 to VI8; VIII4-VIII15; IX; X;  
XI1 (80%); from XI2 to XI4; XI5 (60%);  
XI6; XI7 (95%); XI8 (22%); XII (15%); XIIIa  
(22%); VI; X (EXCEPT XIIIa4-XIIIa9); XIIIb; XIVa1 
XIVa2 (50%); XIVa3 
XIVb; XV1-XV2; XVI5-XVI9 
PA 
10.00 
VII; VIII (EXCEPT VIII4-VIII15); XI1  (20%); XI5 (40%); XI7 (5%); XI8 (78%) 
XII (85%) 
Va-Vb (20%); Vc (40%); Vg  (78%); Vi (9%); VII-VIII 
47 

========47========

TABLE A2. The conversion of labour force into full-time equivalent labour inputs 
Categories of farm labour Male labourers aged 15-65 Landless  day  labourers  aged  15-65 
Children aged 10-15 Males over 65 
Females aged 15-65 Females over 65 
Estimated days of labour 
230 
190 
Conversion coefficients 
1.00 
1.00 
104 104 104 104 
0.5 0.6 0.6 0.5 
48 

========48========

TABLE A3. Total number of workers in Italy (headcount), 1861-2010 
Agriculture,  Forestry,  
Mining  and  
Public  
Total  
and Fishing Quarrying Manufacturing Construction Utilities Industry 
1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 
8,615,517 8,684,944 8,754,371 8,823,798 8,893,226 8,962,653 9,032,080 9,101,507 9,170,934 9,240,362 9,309,789 9,322,070 9,334,350 9,346,631 9,358,912 9,371,193 9,383,474 9,395,755 9,408,035 9,420,316 9,432,597 9,495,010 9,557,424 9,619,837 9,682,250 9,744,664 9,807,077 9,869,490 9,931,903 9,994,317 10,056,730 10,119,143 10,181,557 10,243,970 10,306,383 10,368,797 10,431,210 10,493,623 10,556,036 10,618,450 10,680,863 10,666,608 10,652,353 10,638,098 10,623,843 10,609,588 
25,189 27,080 28,972 30,864 32,756 34,648 36,540 38,432 40,324 42,215 41,063 49,869 54,338 51,294 55,474 54,749 57,423 57,156 63,543 61,988 66,566 76,818 77,069 77,336 76,421 72,776 69,680 72,835 72,764 78,860 84,290 85,735 83,093 77,104 67,705 71,494 79,069 96,884 107,766 112,492 112,987 111,807 113,518 115,228 116,939 118,650 
2,080,548 2,056,114 2,031,680 2,007,246 1,982,812 1,958,378 1,933,944 1,909,510 1,885,076 1,860,642 1,836,208 1,896,934 1,957,660 2,018,387 2,079,113 2,139,839 2,200,565 2,261,291 2,322,018 2,382,744 2,443,470 2,385,964 2,859,709 2,684,952 2,510,251 2,335,551 2,160,850 2,241,696 2,529,478 2,381,454 2,089,698 1,888,696 1,690,473 1,795,187 1,904,661 2,050,925 2,290,566 2,271,858 2,461,207 2,608,685 2,665,214 2,550,050 2,617,182 2,684,314 2,751,446 2,818,578 
199,769 207,587 215,405 223,223 231,041 238,860 246,678 254,496 262,314 270,132 277,950 311,481 345,012 378,542 412,073 445,604 479,134 512,665 546,196 579,726 613,257 609,695 606,134 602,572 599,010 595,449 591,887 588,325 584,763 581,202 577,640 574,078 570,517 566,955 563,393 559,832 556,270 552,708 549,146 545,585 577,640 592,796 607,952 623,108 638,264 653,421 
510 544 579 613 648 682 717 751 786 820 855 918 980 1,043 1,106 1,169 1,232 1,295 1,357 1,420 1,483 2,661 3,839 5,017 6,195 7,373 8,550 9,728 10,906 12,084 13,262 14,440 15,618 16,796 17,974 19,152 20,329 21,507 22,685 23,863 25,041 26,184 27,327 28,470 29,613 30,756 
2,306,016 2,291,326 2,276,636 2,261,947 2,247,257 2,232,568 2,217,878 2,203,189 2,188,499 2,173,810 2,156,076 2,259,202 2,357,991 2,449,266 2,547,766 2,641,361 2,738,354 2,832,407 2,933,114 3,025,879 3,124,776 3,075,138 3,546,751 3,369,876 3,191,877 3,011,147 2,830,967 2,912,584 3,197,912 3,053,600 2,764,891 2,562,949 2,359,701 2,456,041 2,553,733 2,701,401 2,946,234 2,942,958 3,140,804 3,290,624 3,380,882 3,280,837 3,365,979 3,451,121 3,536,263 3,621,405 
49 

========49========

1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 
10,595,333 10,581,078 10,566,823 10,552,568 10,538,313 10,608,846 10,679,378 10,749,911 10,820,443 10,890,976 10,961,509 11,032,041 11,102,574 11,173,106 11,243,639 11,164,213 11,084,786 11,005,360 10,925,933 10,846,507 10,767,080 10,687,654 10,608,227 10,528,801 10,449,374 10,460,082 10,470,790 10,481,497 10,492,205 10,502,913 10,401,424 10,299,936 10,198,447 10,096,958 9,995,470 9,893,981 9,792,492 9,691,004 9,589,515 9,488,026 9,386,538 9,285,049 9,183,560 9,082,072 8,980,583 8,775,887 8,572,146 8,431,163 8,125,602 7,843,681 7,505,408 7,375,837 7,259,322 6,979,535 6,613,058 6,205,192 
120,309 120,673 121,482 121,176 124,294 122,761 122,258 117,025 98,500 93,924 101,167 95,098 98,287 118,544 104,868 98,175 106,002 112,585 129,289 103,223 98,750 134,107 142,191 135,142 117,155 106,486 101,504 107,403 116,513 126,552 151,052 164,890 166,015 167,139 168,264 169,388 170,512 171,637 172,761 173,886 175,010 176,135 177,259 178,384 179,508 184,490 177,172 169,934 162,776 154,660 147,702 137,950 132,190 130,820 125,698 116,506 
2,944,405 3,342,378 3,283,291 3,229,762 3,309,253 3,271,286 3,502,703 3,481,670 3,104,640 3,088,973 2,614,170 3,151,706 3,395,422 3,738,755 3,258,825 3,521,930 3,495,144 3,830,309 4,240,488 4,300,312 4,500,952 4,522,555 4,601,948 4,289,208 3,730,804 3,226,581 3,219,113 3,370,821 3,948,100 3,926,449 4,361,175 4,537,101 4,536,520 4,535,939 4,535,358 4,534,777 4,534,196 4,533,615 4,533,034 4,532,453 4,531,873 4,531,292 4,530,711 4,530,130 4,529,549 4,536,603 4,613,822 4,751,143 4,764,293 4,924,808 5,095,301 5,084,199 5,130,560 5,199,498 5,301,283 5,343,087 
668,577 683,733 698,889 714,045 729,201 744,045 758,890 773,734 788,579 803,423 818,267 833,112 847,956 862,801 877,645 661,180 622,096 743,590 792,636 838,703 772,922 944,081 1,234,126 1,121,816 1,025,827 953,710 975,468 1,014,998 1,147,395 1,042,646 1,316,743 1,295,790 1,309,402 1,323,014 1,336,627 1,350,239 1,363,851 1,377,463 1,391,076 1,404,688 1,418,300 1,431,912 1,445,525 1,459,137 1,472,749 1,657,233 1,852,140 1,952,716 2,016,764 1,952,516 1,959,372 1,954,256 1,948,219 2,038,843 2,138,683 2,203,807 
31,898 33,041 34,184 35,327 36,470 37,170 37,871 38,571 39,272 39,972 40,672 41,373 42,073 42,774 43,474 45,827 48,179 50,532 52,885 55,238 57,590 59,943 62,296 72,568 66,297 60,993 60,459 65,216 66,685 70,270 72,038 73,806 75,574 77,342 79,110 80,878 82,646 84,413 86,181 87,949 89,717 91,485 93,253 95,021 96,789 99,335 101,845 105,342 107,775 107,139 108,512 107,864 109,202 109,528 112,785 115,020 
3,765,189 4,179,824 4,137,847 4,100,310 4,199,218 4,175,262 4,421,722 4,411,001 4,030,990 4,026,292 3,574,277 4,121,288 4,383,738 4,762,873 4,284,812 4,327,112 4,271,422 4,737,016 5,215,298 5,297,476 5,430,214 5,660,686 6,040,561 5,618,734 4,940,083 4,347,770 4,356,545 4,558,438 5,278,693 5,165,917 5,901,008 6,071,586 6,087,510 6,103,434 6,119,358 6,135,281 6,151,205 6,167,129 6,183,053 6,198,976 6,214,900 6,230,824 6,246,748 6,262,671 6,278,595 6,477,660 6,744,979 6,979,135 7,051,608 7,139,123 7,310,887 7,284,269 7,320,172 7,478,690 7,678,449 7,778,419 
50 

========50========

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
5,668,929 5,330,680 5,331,761 5,025,434 4,925,124 4,602,131 4,369,860 4,008,200 4,004,000 3,680,200 3,571,200 3,458,000 3,276,300 3,237,400 3,084,200 3,031,200 2,941,200 2,856,600 2,670,500 2,488,600 2,466,300 2,311,100 2,168,800 2,091,800 2,002,400 1,871,300 1,764,200 1,689,900 1,642,700 1,579,400 1,457,200 1,374,700 1,316,200 1,251,500 1,228,800 1,174,900 1,113,200 1,102,900 1,110,200 1,079,500 1,009,300 1,022,500 1,018,500 1,038,700 1,013,800 993,400 967,200 983,200 
114,456 98,364 88,816 81,024 72,356 66,958 61,640 50,600 50,800 51,500 52,800 54,600 55,700 56,400 58,300 59,400 61,000 62,400 64,100 65,300 60,200 56,000 53,600 56,000 56,700 57,800 58,800 57,200 51,700 49,200 47,600 44,700 43,200 41,600 41,800 42,500 42,800 41,200 40,800 44,700 42,700 41,000 41,700 40,600 40,000 39,000 37,600 36,800 
5,408,083 5,370,298 5,230,390 5,166,041 5,261,289 5,311,445 5,375,586 5,499,800 5,592,600 5,561,900 5,666,000 5,860,400 5,933,700 5,955,400 6,022,700 6,040,400 6,132,600 6,218,700 6,082,200 5,969,900 5,826,000 5,592,600 5,494,700 5,458,700 5,389,100 5,467,300 5,529,400 5,591,600 5,562,100 5,365,800 5,179,600 5,099,100 5,074,300 5,013,500 4,993,500 5,078,500 5,040,200 5,011,600 5,000,400 5,043,900 5,080,600 5,035,400 4,998,900 5,043,100 5,078,500 5,029,000 4,804,500 4,621,100 
2,243,450 2,232,114 2,035,211 1,925,439 1,918,219 1,893,003 1,906,955 1,970,400 1,861,200 1,883,600 1,874,200 1,833,200 1,762,700 1,689,400 1,678,400 1,643,300 1,638,600 1,709,900 1,740,100 1,727,600 1,707,700 1,601,300 1,583,300 1,553,200 1,532,100 1,510,300 1,486,200 1,511,400 1,558,700 1,593,000 1,555,100 1,504,300 1,480,500 1,469,300 1,486,500 1,469,800 1,507,800 1,553,900 1,656,000 1,697,800 1,749,100 1,786,700 1,866,400 1,890,900 1,951,000 1,957,500 1,934,500 1,907,100 
115,280 120,343 123,420 127,399 133,209 142,689 146,440 146,500 150,800 146,500 148,500 149,700 150,300 151,000 152,600 154,200 153,900 155,400 157,600 156,500 157,400 162,100 166,700 171,900 176,100 177,400 179,700 183,300 184,900 181,200 177,700 172,600 164,600 163,500 156,000 151,700 146,200 143,600 139,100 137,800 133,300 129,600 131,000 134,300 131,200 129,400 128,000 128,600 
7,881,269 7,821,119 7,477,837 7,299,904 7,385,072 7,414,095 7,490,621 7,667,300 7,655,400 7,643,500 7,741,500 7,897,900 7,902,400 7,852,200 7,912,000 7,897,300 7,986,100 8,146,400 8,044,000 7,919,300 7,751,300 7,412,000 7,298,300 7,239,800 7,154,000 7,212,800 7,254,100 7,343,500 7,357,400 7,189,200 6,960,000 6,820,700 6,762,600 6,687,900 6,677,800 6,742,500 6,737,000 6,750,300 6,836,300 6,924,200 7,005,700 6,992,700 7,038,000 7,108,900 7,200,700 7,154,900 6,904,600 6,693,600 
51 

========51========

Trade, Hotels  
and  Restaurants 
Transport  
and  comunica- 
tions 
1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 
672,819 683,342 693,866 704,390 714,913 725,437 735,960 746,484 757,007 767,531 778,054 790,224 802,393 814,563 826,732 838,902 851,071 863,241 875,410 887,580 899,749 906,420 913,091 919,762 926,433 933,104 939,775 946,446 953,117 959,788 966,459 973,130 979,801 986,472 993,143 999,814 1,006,485 1,013,156 1,019,827 1,026,498 966,459 969,197 971,935 974,673 977,411 980,149 
238,015 239,115 246,215 246,315 239,350 264,442 272,942 283,187 288,146 293,922 294,518 310,368 330,281 350,614 369,880 388,657 400,246 413,610 339,727 373,843 383,161 395,312 410,369 419,577 406,545 399,388 425,608 446,144 448,701 455,488 437,646 440,338 461,406 466,538 464,599 472,379 483,000 479,853 480,120 488,585 496,668 503,088 463,185 517,998 528,879 538,172 
(Table A3 continued) 
Credit  
and  Insurance 
Community,  Social and  Personal  Services 
Government  Services 
6,631 7,152 7,673 8,195 8,716 9,237 9,758 10,280 10,801 11,322 11,843 12,919 13,995 15,070 16,146 17,221 18,297 19,372 20,448 21,523 22,599 22,805 23,011 23,217 23,424 23,630 23,836 24,042 24,248 24,454 24,660 24,867 25,073 25,279 25,213 25,857 29,624 30,269 30,450 30,814 30,219 32,043 35,681 37,209 39,808 41,254 
864,378 868,761 873,143 877,526 881,908 886,291 890,673 895,056 899,438 903,821 908,203 926,214 944,224 962,234 980,244 998,255 1,016,265 1,034,275 1,052,285 1,070,296 1,088,306 1,087,040 1,085,774 1,084,508 1,083,242 1,081,976 1,080,710 1,079,444 1,078,178 1,076,912 1,075,646 1,074,380 1,073,114 1,071,848 1,070,582 1,069,316 1,068,050 1,066,784 1,065,518 1,064,252 1,062,986 1,065,206 1,067,426 1,069,646 1,071,866 1,074,086 
Total  Services 
Total Economy 
162,144 167,582 173,020 178,458 183,896 189,334 194,772 200,210 205,648 211,086 216,524 223,786 231,048 238,310 245,572 252,834 260,096 267,358 274,620 281,882 289,144 291,349 293,553 295,758 297,963 300,167 302,372 304,577 306,781 308,986 311,191 313,395 315,600 317,804 320,009 322,214 324,418 326,623 328,828 331,032 333,237 336,543 339,848 343,154 346,459 349,765 
1,943,986 1,965,952 1,993,918 2,014,883 2,028,783 2,074,741 2,104,106 2,135,216 2,161,041 2,187,682 2,209,144 2,263,511 2,321,941 2,380,791 2,438,574 2,495,868 2,545,974 2,597,856 2,562,491 2,635,124 2,682,959 2,702,926 2,725,798 2,742,823 2,737,606 2,738,265 2,772,301 2,800,652 2,811,025 2,825,628 2,815,602 2,826,109 2,854,994 2,867,941 2,873,545 2,889,580 2,911,578 2,916,685 2,924,743 2,941,181 2,889,569 2,906,077 2,878,075 2,942,679 2,964,423 2,983,425 
12,865,518 12,942,222 13,024,925 13,100,628 13,169,266 13,269,961 13,354,065 13,439,912 13,520,475 13,601,853 13,675,009 13,844,783 14,014,282 14,176,689 14,345,252 14,508,422 14,667,802 14,826,017 14,903,640 15,081,319 15,240,332 15,273,075 15,829,973 15,732,536 15,611,733 15,494,075 15,410,345 15,582,727 15,940,841 15,873,544 15,637,223 15,508,202 15,396,251 15,567,952 15,733,662 15,959,778 16,289,022 16,353,266 16,621,584 16,850,255 16,951,314 16,853,521 16,896,406 17,031,898 17,124,529 17,214,418 
52 

========52========

1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 
982,886 985,624 988,362 991,100 993,838 1,006,642 1,019,446 1,032,250 1,045,054 1,057,858 1,070,662 1,083,466 1,096,270 1,109,074 1,121,878 1,178,241 1,234,604 1,290,966 1,347,329 1,403,692 1,460,055 1,428,790 1,397,525 1,366,261 1,334,996 1,392,553 1,450,111 1,507,668 1,565,226 1,622,783 1,625,173 1,627,564 1,629,954 1,632,344 1,634,735 1,637,125 1,639,515 1,641,906 1,644,296 1,646,686 1,649,077 1,651,467 1,653,857 1,656,248 1,658,638 1,761,515 1,858,127 1,969,250 2,056,451 2,165,643 2,267,244 2,348,539 2,376,990 2,390,894 2,454,817 2,445,904 
533,288 591,961 591,777 578,910 600,580 612,627 623,416 640,243 653,869 668,875 636,164 637,728 682,607 719,988 730,156 767,769 747,399 736,691 756,325 714,761 727,194 737,457 748,019 760,510 743,859 717,242 702,427 700,080 703,538 708,012 701,677 735,014 733,319 738,008 742,696 747,384 752,072 756,760 761,449 766,137 770,825 775,513 780,202 784,890 789,578 797,068 803,988 809,103 834,362 836,893 850,712 848,587 850,643 892,532 949,056 969,528 
43,173 45,758 48,144 53,227 55,524 54,835 55,807 57,827 57,693 57,112 54,776 53,026 57,689 68,250 71,580 75,132 77,483 82,165 86,616 92,589 99,309 101,882 105,094 107,282 109,149 106,172 103,814 102,694 105,465 97,904 103,127 108,350 113,573 118,795 124,018 129,241 134,464 139,687 144,910 150,133 155,356 160,578 165,801 171,024 176,247 176,203 182,816 187,338 190,771 194,996 199,067 204,788 205,856 212,116 213,811 219,686 
1,076,306 1,078,526 1,080,746 1,082,966 1,085,186 1,086,923 1,088,661 1,090,398 1,092,135 1,093,873 1,095,610 1,097,347 1,099,084 1,100,822 1,102,559 1,114,434 1,126,309 1,138,184 1,150,059 1,161,934 1,173,809 1,185,684 1,197,559 1,209,434 1,221,309 1,261,350 1,301,391 1,341,432 1,381,473 1,421,514 1,406,801 1,392,089 1,377,376 1,362,664 1,347,951 1,333,238 1,318,526 1,303,813 1,289,101 1,274,388 1,259,675 1,244,963 1,230,250 1,215,538 1,200,825 1,223,232 1,244,808 1,266,385 1,277,173 1,304,559 1,336,094 1,381,737 1,358,501 1,312,028 1,297,920 1,248,958 
1,016,972 1,176,060 1,341,437 1,490,407 1,365,345 1,240,283 1,115,221 1,134,304 1,153,386 1,174,770 1,115,948 1,194,314 1,253,831 1,310,397 1,361,483 1,418,111 1,470,043 1,531,241 1,579,078 1,641,243 1,729,918 1,824,621 1,940,017 
353,070 356,376 359,681 362,987 366,292 376,897 387,501 398,106 408,710 419,315 429,919 440,524 451,128 461,733 472,337 494,801 517,265 539,729 562,194 584,658 596,801 601,792 592,017 607,634 626,018 716,413 694,885 681,912 684,032 688,858 730,936 800,337 858,470 
2,988,724 3,058,244 3,068,710 3,069,190 3,101,420 3,137,924 3,174,830 3,218,824 3,257,462 3,297,031 3,287,131 3,312,091 3,386,778 3,459,866 3,498,510 3,630,378 3,703,060 3,787,736 3,902,524 3,957,634 4,057,168 4,055,605 4,040,215 4,051,120 4,035,331 4,193,730 4,252,627 4,333,786 4,439,733 4,539,071 4,567,714 4,663,353 4,712,692 4,868,783 5,025,459 5,188,426 5,334,984 5,207,511 5,080,038 4,952,565 4,969,237 4,985,908 5,004,880 4,943,647 5,019,602 5,211,849 5,400,136 5,593,558 5,776,867 5,972,133 6,184,359 6,362,729 6,433,232 6,537,488 6,740,225 6,824,094 
17,349,246 17,819,147 17,773,380 17,722,067 17,838,951 17,922,032 18,275,931 18,379,735 18,108,895 18,214,299 17,822,916 18,465,420 18,873,090 19,395,845 19,026,961 19,121,702 19,059,268 19,530,112 20,043,754 20,101,616 20,254,462 20,403,944 20,689,003 20,198,655 19,424,788 19,001,582 19,079,961 19,373,721 20,210,631 20,207,901 20,870,147 21,034,875 20,998,649 21,069,176 21,140,287 21,217,688 21,278,682 21,065,644 20,852,606 20,639,568 20,570,674 20,501,781 20,435,188 20,288,390 20,278,780 20,465,396 20,717,262 21,003,856 20,954,076 20,954,937 21,000,653 21,022,835 21,012,725 20,995,712 21,031,732 20,807,705 
53 

========53========

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
2,439,327 2,553,939 2,536,045 2,585,627 2,696,304 2,787,519 2,879,974 2,981,400 2,880,800 3,013,600 3,094,800 3,214,900 3,307,900 3,412,000 3,431,000 3,456,000 3,553,300 3,648,600 3,739,600 3,879,200 3,986,000 4,166,200 4,233,100 4,278,200 4,353,600 4,356,900 4,326,700 4,378,400 4,465,600 4,446,300 4,330,100 4,253,200 4,220,600 4,227,100 4,193,300 4,219,800 4,299,200 4,406,900 4,549,600 4,597,200 4,677,200 4,689,800 4,697,300 4,843,100 4,916,200 4,932,400 4,833,100 4,829,600 
986,580 981,510 983,168 976,046 965,541 954,733 945,520 951,000 960,300 976,900 1,009,700 1,031,400 1,043,900 1,067,600 1,068,200 1,076,400 1,087,800 1,094,200 1,114,600 1,129,400 1,130,800 1,120,000 1,133,100 1,169,300 1,174,800 1,187,600 1,184,600 1,182,800 1,184,900 1,178,200 1,135,800 1,101,200 1,079,800 1,119,000 1,141,800 1,151,700 1,187,000 1,224,800 1,217,000 1,201,500 1,216,500 1,211,500 1,219,200 1,231,900 1,247,100 1,258,700 1,223,800 1,194,600 
228,731 231,614 230,217 232,033 230,504 235,269 236,688 237,000 242,100 254,600 272,400 293,900 314,800 342,300 363,200 396,700 428,300 454,500 478,900 506,000 519,600 541,600 561,400 564,200 561,300 568,000 586,000 594,900 611,100 621,200 614,900 608,400 604,800 592,800 592,800 598,500 593,600 591,500 602,700 604,300 601,400 605,300 608,200 620,300 637,700 641,800 634,500 632,600 
1,209,954 1,306,219 1,215,763 1,235,680 1,266,385 1,309,538 1,326,966 1,381,071 1,360,710 1,394,845 1,475,950 1,541,788 1,576,766 1,633,114 1,664,768 1,738,974 1,814,316 1,918,549 2,021,818 2,179,287 2,319,034 2,551,113 2,872,409 3,039,122 3,136,791 3,359,359 3,560,541 3,800,976 4,108,504 4,171,101 4,090,666 4,076,657 4,218,824 4,469,908 4,622,247 4,766,781 4,968,795 5,266,683 5,437,997 5,744,185 6,019,722 6,138,067 6,224,409 6,424,444 7,242,658 6,704,804 6,601,245 6,658,966 
2,047,690 2,149,785 2,229,245 2,304,508 2,399,654 2,489,384 2,607,414 2,712,629 2,841,790 2,929,755 3,009,450 3,050,812 3,082,234 3,166,886 3,251,932 3,247,626 3,264,784 3,261,551 3,293,782 3,304,613 3,302,766 3,372,987 3,411,091 3,444,878 3,496,609 3,559,341 3,590,459 3,631,024 3,673,796 3,690,699 3,672,834 3,659,643 3,647,376 3,626,492 3,586,353 3,606,219 3,602,405 3,593,917 3,645,603 3,651,715 3,628,678 3,605,233 3,598,991 3,615,756 3,576,642 3,570,296 3,674,655 3,665,234 
6,912,280 7,223,066 7,194,439 7,333,894 7,558,388 7,776,443 7,996,562 8,263,100 8,285,700 8,569,700 8,862,300 9,132,800 9,325,600 9,621,900 9,779,100 9,915,700 10,148,500 10,377,400 10,648,700 10,998,500 11,258,200 11,751,900 12,211,100 12,495,700 12,723,100 13,031,200 13,248,300 13,588,100 14,043,900 14,107,500 13,844,300 13,699,100 13,771,400 14,035,300 14,136,500 14,343,000 14,651,000 15,083,800 15,452,900 15,798,900 16,143,500 16,249,900 16,348,100 16,735,500 17,620,300 17,108,000 16,967,300 16,981,000 
20,462,479 20,374,865 20,004,036 19,659,232 19,868,585 19,792,669 19,857,043 19,938,600 19,945,100 19,893,400 20,175,000 20,488,700 20,504,300 20,711,500 20,775,300 20,844,200 21,075,800 21,380,400 21,363,200 21,406,400 21,475,800 21,475,000 21,678,200 21,827,300 21,879,500 22,115,300 22,266,600 22,621,500 23,044,000 22,876,100 22,261,500 21,894,500 21,850,200 21,974,700 22,043,100 22,260,400 22,501,200 22,937,000 23,399,400 23,802,600 24,158,500 24,265,100 24,404,600 24,883,100 25,834,800 25,256,300 24,839,100 24,657,800 
54 

========54========

TABLE A4. Full-time equivalent workers in Italy, 1861-2010 
Agriculture,  Forestry,  
Mining  
and  
Public  
Total  
and Fishing Quarrying Manufacturing Construction Utilities Industry 
1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 
5,330,843 5,388,575 5,446,306 5,504,038 5,561,769 5,619,501 5,677,233 5,734,964 5,792,696 5,850,427 5,908,159 5,934,953 5,961,747 5,988,541 6,015,335 6,042,129 6,068,923 6,095,717 6,122,511 6,149,304 6,176,098 6,179,046 6,181,993 6,184,940 6,187,888 6,190,835 6,193,782 6,196,730 6,199,677 6,202,624 6,205,571 6,208,519 6,211,466 6,214,413 6,217,361 6,220,308 6,223,255 6,226,203 6,229,150 6,232,097 6,235,045 6,256,650 6,278,256 6,299,862 6,321,468 6,343,074 
18,474 19,862 21,249 22,637 24,024 25,412 26,800 28,187 29,575 30,962 30,117 36,576 39,853 37,621 40,686 40,155 42,116 41,920 46,605 45,465 48,822 56,341 56,525 56,721 56,050 53,376 51,106 53,420 53,368 57,839 61,822 62,881 60,943 56,550 49,657 52,436 57,992 64,211 70,430 76,649 82,869 80,320 80,432 80,544 80,656 80,768 
1,442,496 1,425,555 1,408,614 1,391,674 1,374,733 1,357,792 1,340,851 1,323,911 1,306,970 1,290,029 1,273,089 1,315,191 1,357,294 1,399,397 1,441,500 1,483,603 1,525,706 1,567,809 1,609,912 1,652,015 1,694,118 1,654,248 1,982,707 1,861,543 1,740,419 1,619,295 1,498,171 1,554,223 1,753,750 1,651,121 1,448,840 1,309,479 1,172,047 1,244,648 1,320,549 1,421,957 1,588,106 1,575,136 1,706,416 1,808,666 1,847,859 1,768,013 1,814,557 1,861,102 1,907,646 1,954,190 
29,853 31,021 32,189 33,358 34,526 35,694 36,863 38,031 39,199 40,367 41,536 46,546 51,557 56,568 61,579 66,589 71,600 76,611 81,621 86,632 91,643 91,110 90,578 90,046 89,514 88,981 88,449 87,917 87,385 86,852 86,320 85,788 85,256 84,724 84,191 83,659 83,127 82,595 82,062 81,530 86,320 88,585 90,850 93,115 95,380 97,645 
496 1,491,319 
530 1,476,967 
563 1,462,616 
597 1,448,265 
630 1,433,913 
664 1,419,562 
697 1,405,211 
731 1,390,860 
764 1,376,508 
798 1,362,157 
832 1,345,573 
893 1,399,207 
954 1,449,659 1,015 1,494,601 1,076 1,544,841 1,137 1,591,485 1,198 1,640,621 1,259 1,687,599 1,321 1,739,459 1,382 1,785,494 1,443 1,836,026 2,589 1,804,288 3,735 2,133,545 4,881 2,013,191 6,027 1,892,010 7,173 1,768,826 8,319 1,646,045 9,465 1,705,025 10,611 1,905,114 11,757 1,807,569 12,903 1,609,884 14,049 1,472,198 15,195 1,333,441 16,341 1,402,263 17,487 1,471,884 18,633 1,576,685 19,779 1,749,004 20,925 1,742,866 22,071 1,880,979 23,217 1,990,062 24,363 2,041,411 25,475 1,962,393 26,587 2,012,426 27,699 2,062,459 28,811 2,112,492 29,923 2,162,525 
55 

========55========

1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 
6,364,680 6,386,286 6,407,892 6,429,498 6,451,104 6,558,703 6,666,303 6,773,902 6,881,501 6,989,101 7,096,700 7,204,300 7,311,899 7,419,498 7,527,098 7,548,175 7,569,253 7,590,331 7,611,409 7,632,486 7,653,564 7,674,642 7,695,720 7,716,797 7,737,875 7,605,795 7,473,715 7,341,635 7,209,555 7,077,474 7,037,154 6,996,833 6,956,512 6,916,192 6,875,871 6,835,550 6,795,230 6,754,909 6,714,588 6,674,268 6,633,947 6,593,626 6,553,306 6,512,985 6,472,664 6,412,110 6,349,851 6,325,164 6,161,848 6,024,629 5,826,041 5,775,095 5,743,613 5,614,177 5,398,710 5,212,131 
80,334 79,069 76,726 75,176 75,767 76,242 77,341 75,390 64,606 62,709 68,740 65,747 69,128 84,801 76,584 70,836 75,601 79,402 90,207 92,587 97,099 93,450 98,378 92,858 81,344 75,969 74,406 80,897 90,176 100,681 121,685 133,700 132,543 131,386 130,230 129,073 127,916 126,759 125,603 124,446 123,289 122,132 120,976 119,819 118,662 117,599 115,874 115,903 114,001 110,013 107,111 102,023 98,132 96,456 92,595 88,222 
2,041,429 2,317,353 2,276,387 2,239,274 2,294,387 2,268,064 2,428,511 2,413,928 2,152,524 2,141,661 2,213,253 2,284,844 2,356,435 2,428,027 2,116,350 2,287,216 2,269,821 2,487,484 2,753,863 2,792,715 2,570,014 2,582,349 2,627,682 2,449,110 2,130,265 1,842,357 1,838,092 1,924,716 2,254,339 2,351,026 2,611,325 3,255,920 3,270,620 3,285,319 3,300,019 3,314,718 3,329,418 3,344,117 3,358,817 3,373,516 3,388,216 3,402,915 3,417,615 3,432,314 3,447,014 3,507,728 3,612,270 3,765,327 3,831,513 4,007,146 4,191,701 4,243,293 4,338,092 4,477,977 4,637,108 4,739,886 
99,909 31,035 2,252,707 102,174 32,147 2,530,743 104,439 33,259 2,490,811 106,704 34,371 2,455,525 108,969 35,483 2,514,606 124,665 36,812 2,505,782 140,361 38,141 2,684,355 156,058 39,470 2,684,845 171,754 40,799 2,429,683 187,450 42,128 2,433,948 203,146 43,457 2,528,596 218,842 44,786 2,614,219 234,539 46,115 2,706,216 250,235 47,444 2,810,506 265,931 48,773 2,507,638 281,627 50,102 2,689,781 264,979 51,431 2,661,832 316,729 52,760 2,936,376 337,620 54,089 3,235,779 357,242 55,418 3,297,962 329,223 56,747 3,053,083 400,304 45,773 3,121,875 520,902 34,799 3,281,761 471,330 40,537 3,053,835 429,019 37,034 2,677,661 402,459 32,224 2,353,008 415,426 30,299 2,358,223 436,310 31,156 2,473,079 497,931 30,369 2,872,815 457,148 30,513 2,939,368 574,595 31,954 3,339,560 561,710 41,174 3,992,504 559,429 45,158 4,007,749 557,148 49,142 4,022,995 554,866 53,125 4,038,240 552,585 57,109 4,053,486 550,304 61,093 4,068,731 548,023 65,077 4,083,977 545,742 69,061 4,099,222 543,461 73,045 4,114,468 541,180 77,029 4,129,713 538,898 81,012 4,144,959 536,617 84,996 4,160,204 534,336 88,980 4,175,450 532,055 92,964 4,190,695 642,015 96,007 4,363,349 767,444 98,731 4,594,319 864,187 103,242 4,848,659 951,575 106,357 5,003,446 982,788 107,710 5,207,657 1,048,089 110,295 5,457,196 1,109,587 110,757 5,565,660 1,172,241 112,614 5,721,079 1,296,616 117,356 5,988,404 1,436,683 119,839 6,286,225 1,561,972 121,911 6,511,990 
56 

========56========

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
4,818,074 4,656,900 4,619,231 4,421,883 4,400,440 4,122,739 3,977,741 3,725,700 3,708,900 3,413,100 3,355,700 3,285,900 3,160,900 3,156,700 3,043,600 3,044,700 2,995,000 2,942,800 2,795,500 2,635,900 2,666,700 2,574,800 2,440,600 2,392,000 2,318,100 2,189,300 2,069,400 2,018,700 1,994,600 1,959,100 1,808,900 1,742,000 1,699,300 1,648,900 1,625,200 1,578,500 1,507,000 1,491,500 1,505,600 1,457,000 1,388,800 1,388,000 1,345,400 1,361,100 1,321,000 1,294,200 1,261,100 1,281,400 
83,617 79,126 74,831 70,583 66,599 61,924 56,382 50,800 50,800 51,300 52,800 54,700 55,700 56,600 58,600 59,400 61,400 62,900 64,000 65,800 60,900 56,300 53,500 55,600 56,800 57,900 58,700 56,700 51,100 48,600 46,200 43,200 42,300 40,500 40,500 41,200 41,500 40,200 39,800 44,100 41,400 40,100 40,700 39,500 38,800 37,900 36,400 35,500 
4,871,167 4,892,406 4,834,167 4,850,519 5,015,302 5,140,928 5,282,564 5,458,800 5,540,300 5,442,500 5,594,100 5,779,300 5,758,000 5,820,700 5,953,400 5,926,800 6,034,400 6,132,300 5,927,700 5,797,300 5,594,000 5,360,600 5,307,900 5,299,600 5,264,400 5,372,800 5,436,100 5,472,800 5,377,400 5,163,000 4,931,600 4,915,300 4,949,500 4,877,900 4,877,000 4,965,600 4,920,000 4,903,200 4,879,200 4,909,200 4,914,900 4,869,900 4,815,500 4,861,300 4,903,000 4,835,300 4,375,000 4,215,200 
1,676,167 123,895 6,754,845 1,756,347 126,323 6,854,202 1,688,426 129,443 6,726,866 1,681,050 133,162 6,735,314 1,759,413 138,103 6,979,417 1,824,986 142,462 7,170,300 1,930,812 145,568 7,415,325 1,968,300 146,400 7,624,300 1,860,700 150,500 7,602,300 1,854,800 145,800 7,494,400 1,850,600 147,900 7,645,400 1,812,000 149,200 7,795,200 1,748,900 149,900 7,712,500 1,667,900 150,700 7,695,900 1,660,700 152,500 7,825,200 1,625,900 154,200 7,766,300 1,611,700 153,900 7,861,400 1,700,000 155,400 8,050,600 1,724,500 157,500 7,873,700 1,722,900 156,500 7,742,500 1,711,200 157,400 7,523,500 1,608,200 162,000 7,187,100 1,592,300 166,500 7,120,200 1,574,200 171,500 7,100,900 1,560,200 175,600 7,057,000 1,550,200 176,900 7,157,800 1,533,700 178,900 7,207,400 1,561,800 182,500 7,273,800 1,611,500 184,200 7,224,200 1,648,600 180,400 7,040,600 1,602,500 173,500 6,753,800 1,555,500 169,600 6,683,600 1,528,800 163,600 6,684,200 1,516,500 162,300 6,597,200 1,545,200 155,300 6,618,000 1,522,300 150,900 6,680,000 1,559,200 145,300 6,666,000 1,610,600 142,700 6,696,700 1,710,500 138,000 6,767,500 1,746,200 136,600 6,836,100 1,794,100 131,900 6,882,300 1,823,500 128,400 6,861,900 1,898,300 129,600 6,884,100 1,921,200 132,900 6,954,900 1,978,900 129,800 7,050,500 1,979,200 127,900 6,980,300 1,955,400 126,500 6,493,300 1,933,600 127,200 6,311,500 
57 

========57========

Trade,  Hotels  and  Restaur ants 
Transport  
and  Comunica- 
tion 
Credit and  Insurance 
1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 
645,697 655,796 665,895 675,995 686,094 696,193 706,292 716,392 726,491 736,590 746,690 758,369 770,048 781,726 793,405 805,084 816,763 828,442 840,121 851,800 863,479 866,680 869,881 873,082 876,283 879,484 882,685 885,886 889,087 892,288 895,489 898,690 901,891 905,092 908,293 911,494 914,696 917,897 921,098 924,299 927,500 930,127 932,755 935,382 938,010 940,637 
121,456 122,018 125,641 125,692 122,138 134,942 139,279 144,507 147,038 149,985 150,289 158,377 168,539 178,914 188,745 198,327 204,241 211,060 173,359 190,768 198,292 211,965 235,923 247,523 260,498 273,473 286,449 299,424 300,577 304,275 299,842 295,410 290,977 291,131 280,996 290,761 303,569 303,704 305,990 316,506 326,472 334,222 338,499 346,448 354,396 362,345 
(Table A4 continued) 
Community,  Social and  Personal  Services 
Government  
Services 
6,108 6,588 7,069 7,549 8,029 8,509 8,989 9,470 9,950 10,430 10,910 11,901 12,892 13,883 14,873 15,864 16,855 17,846 18,837 19,827 20,818 21,008 21,198 21,388 21,578 21,768 21,958 22,148 22,337 22,527 22,717 22,907 23,097 23,287 23,226 23,820 27,290 27,883 28,051 28,386 27,838 29,569 32,977 34,436 36,711 38,095 
697,573 701,110 704,647 708,184 711,721 715,257 718,794 722,331 725,868 729,405 732,941 747,476 762,011 776,546 791,080 805,615 820,150 834,684 849,219 863,754 878,289 877,267 876,245 875,223 874,202 873,180 872,158 871,137 870,115 869,093 868,072 867,050 866,028 865,007 863,985 862,963 861,941 860,920 859,898 858,876 857,855 859,646 861,438 863,229 865,021 866,813 
140,832 145,555 150,279 155,002 159,725 164,449 169,172 173,895 178,619 183,342 188,065 194,373 200,680 206,988 213,295 219,603 225,910 232,218 238,525 244,833 251,140 253,055 254,970 256,885 258,800 260,715 262,629 264,544 266,459 268,374 270,289 272,204 274,119 276,034 277,949 279,863 281,778 283,693 285,608 287,523 289,438 292,309 295,180 298,051 300,922 303,793 
Total Services 
Total Economy 
1,611,667 1,631,068 1,653,531 1,672,421 1,687,707 1,719,351 1,742,528 1,766,595 1,787,965 1,809,752 1,828,896 1,870,496 1,914,169 1,958,057 2,001,400 2,044,493 2,083,919 2,124,250 2,120,061 2,170,982 2,212,018 2,229,975 2,258,217 2,274,101 2,291,360 2,308,620 2,325,879 2,343,139 2,348,576 2,356,558 2,356,409 2,356,261 2,356,113 2,360,550 2,354,449 2,368,902 2,389,274 2,394,097 2,400,644 2,415,590 2,429,102 2,445,873 2,460,848 2,477,547 2,495,060 2,511,683 
8,433,828 8,496,610 8,562,453 8,624,724 8,683,389 8,758,414 8,824,971 8,892,418 8,957,169 9,022,336 9,082,628 9,204,656 9,325,575 9,441,199 9,561,576 9,678,107 9,793,462 9,907,567 9,982,031 10,105,780 10,224,142 10,213,309 10,573,755 10,472,233 10,371,258 10,268,280 10,165,706 10,244,893 10,453,367 10,366,751 10,171,865 10,036,978 9,901,020 9,977,226 10,043,694 10,165,895 10,361,533 10,363,166 10,510,774 10,637,749 10,705,557 10,664,917 10,751,530 10,839,868 10,929,020 11,017,283 
58 

========58========

1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 
943,265 945,892 948,520 951,147 953,775 966,063 978,351 990,639 1,002,926 1,015,214 1,027,502 1,039,790 1,052,078 1,064,366 1,076,654 1,140,554 1,204,454 1,268,354 1,332,254 1,396,155 1,460,055 1,415,336 1,370,618 1,325,899 1,281,180 1,336,418 1,381,066 1,417,244 1,446,645 1,557,366 1,559,660 1,561,954 1,564,248 1,566,542 1,568,836 1,571,130 1,573,424 1,575,718 1,578,012 1,580,306 1,582,600 1,584,894 1,587,188 1,589,482 1,591,776 1,699,020 1,798,664 1,916,141 2,031,365 2,180,072 2,320,266 2,430,337 2,482,618 2,557,999 2,654,004 2,700,604 
407,878 444,614 449,696 449,083 448,203 446,812 447,344 455,343 465,742 496,875 500,999 506,228 567,813 622,664 640,560 671,402 602,620 520,499 528,360 519,643 510,160 499,849 490,408 482,791 457,710 433,953 417,175 409,068 404,556 401,510 397,918 416,823 415,862 421,743 435,582 449,422 463,261 477,100 490,939 504,778 518,617 532,456 546,295 560,134 573,973 587,450 600,203 614,031 641,869 654,391 677,028 686,753 699,397 746,753 801,191 830,714 
39,915 42,352 44,606 49,361 51,149 50,538 51,458 53,347 53,251 52,786 50,655 49,139 54,155 64,913 65,940 69,204 71,361 75,666 79,757 85,248 91,484 91,859 92,783 92,783 92,508 89,985 87,986 87,037 89,385 94,083 98,780 103,478 108,175 112,873 117,570 122,268 126,965 131,663 136,360 141,058 145,755 150,453 155,150 159,848 164,545 164,672 171,379 176,026 180,519 187,809 194,105 201,749 203,699 214,916 217,215 222,327 
868,604 870,396 872,187 873,979 875,771 877,173 878,575 879,977 881,379 882,781 884,183 885,585 886,987 888,389 889,791 899,374 908,958 918,541 928,125 937,708 947,291 956,875 966,458 976,042 985,625 1,017,939 1,050,253 1,082,567 1,114,881 1,147,195 1,135,322 1,123,448 1,111,575 1,099,702 1,087,828 1,075,955 1,064,081 1,052,208 1,040,334 1,028,461 1,016,588 1,004,714 992,841 980,967 969,094 998,861 1,028,311 1,058,201 1,091,764 1,145,097 1,201,444 1,265,895 1,265,584 1,261,414 1,253,638 1,160,209 
306,664 309,535 312,406 315,277 318,148 327,359 336,570 345,780 354,991 364,202 373,412 382,623 391,834 401,044 410,255 429,767 449,278 468,790 488,301 507,813 518,360 522,695 514,205 527,769 543,737 638,329 635,570 640,699 660,693 683,935 722,127 786,805 839,827 990,045 1,139,374 1,293,328 1,430,061 1,305,002 1,179,943 1,054,884 1,064,650 1,074,415 1,089,261 1,074,575 1,097,209 1,163,658 1,227,924 1,287,500 1,352,366 1,414,506 1,488,729 1,546,147 1,617,992 1,718,258 1,804,418 1,909,002 
2,566,327 2,612,789 2,627,415 2,638,848 2,647,046 2,667,944 2,692,297 2,725,085 2,758,288 2,811,858 2,836,751 2,863,365 2,952,867 3,041,376 3,083,199 3,210,301 3,236,672 3,251,850 3,356,797 3,446,567 3,527,350 3,486,613 3,434,472 3,405,283 3,360,760 3,516,624 3,572,050 3,636,615 3,716,161 3,884,090 3,913,808 3,992,509 4,039,688 4,190,905 4,349,191 4,512,102 4,657,792 4,541,690 4,425,588 4,309,487 4,328,209 4,346,932 4,370,735 4,365,006 4,396,597 4,613,661 4,826,481 5,051,899 5,297,883 5,581,874 5,881,572 6,130,882 6,269,290 6,499,340 6,730,467 6,822,857 
11,183,714 11,529,818 11,526,119 11,523,870 11,612,756 11,732,430 12,042,954 12,183,833 12,069,472 12,234,906 12,462,047 12,681,884 12,970,982 13,271,380 13,117,935 13,448,257 13,467,756 13,778,557 14,203,984 14,377,015 14,233,997 14,283,130 14,411,952 14,175,915 13,776,296 13,475,427 13,403,988 13,451,328 13,798,530 13,900,932 14,290,521 14,981,846 15,003,949 15,130,091 15,263,302 15,401,138 15,521,753 15,380,576 15,239,399 15,098,222 15,091,869 15,085,517 15,084,245 15,053,440 15,059,956 15,389,120 15,770,651 16,225,721 16,463,178 16,814,160 17,164,809 17,471,637 17,733,982 18,101,921 18,415,402 18,546,978 
59 

========59========

1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
2,755,067 2,850,147 2,856,609 2,886,685 2,994,920 3,074,824 3,207,225 3,307,700 3,192,800 3,327,000 3,418,400 3,559,100 3,660,300 3,775,500 3,800,200 3,823,300 3,930,800 4,038,700 4,141,000 4,290,100 4,402,700 4,583,300 4,632,900 4,684,900 4,760,000 4,762,000 4,717,600 4,742,200 4,796,600 4,742,300 4,591,600 4,539,600 4,502,300 4,504,500 4,489,600 4,548,500 4,571,700 4,706,600 4,789,600 4,855,500 4,947,400 4,967,000 4,940,400 5,016,700 5,026,500 4,995,200 4,886,300 4,874,700 
861,577 875,749 895,331 907,359 917,072 921,129 936,537 954,100 962,800 988,400 1,038,300 1,078,000 1,107,400 1,149,800 1,169,000 1,195,600 1,226,900 1,252,500 1,297,900 1,341,400 1,369,900 1,366,500 1,373,100 1,411,000 1,427,300 1,443,600 1,458,500 1,440,300 1,432,800 1,449,800 1,425,600 1,421,800 1,375,400 1,420,800 1,437,000 1,462,600 1,496,800 1,524,300 1,541,200 1,564,300 1,575,700 1,572,400 1,599,100 1,635,200 1,661,600 1,674,300 1,628,300 1,608,800 
230,408 233,111 231,968 233,165 231,782 235,962 236,996 238,000 243,200 253,900 272,000 294,000 315,300 343,400 364,700 399,200 431,500 458,900 484,900 514,300 528,800 555,200 572,700 575,100 574,000 578,200 591,600 597,000 610,000 620,300 612,500 604,800 600,800 588,600 589,900 596,700 589,800 587,500 597,400 597,100 592,900 597,800 598,900 612,800 631,600 635,800 628,000 625,700 
1,082,217 1,198,518 1,095,795 1,135,772 1,198,914 1,288,208 1,313,134 1,388,445 1,373,708 1,408,105 1,498,905 1,575,162 1,619,934 1,688,038 1,731,818 1,820,205 1,909,684 2,032,436 2,150,514 2,332,898 2,503,277 2,742,929 3,034,604 3,173,740 3,264,272 3,448,833 3,587,123 3,758,134 3,924,531 3,968,248 3,867,638 3,842,028 3,979,103 4,182,338 4,324,857 4,419,517 4,585,348 4,842,363 5,021,007 5,214,754 5,319,538 5,441,192 5,517,092 5,671,196 5,842,219 5,881,798 5,752,911 5,782,636 
2,004,385 2,096,161 2,182,624 2,278,519 2,380,847 2,487,564 2,596,029 2,710,855 2,844,092 2,931,195 3,014,095 3,058,538 3,092,566 3,179,662 3,266,782 3,265,995 3,285,516 3,285,464 3,315,486 3,324,702 3,332,123 3,404,771 3,441,696 3,473,160 3,527,928 3,590,967 3,616,077 3,647,166 3,682,669 3,696,552 3,676,362 3,661,572 3,646,597 3,621,162 3,576,443 3,584,283 3,578,052 3,563,337 3,606,293 3,607,446 3,576,262 3,544,708 3,526,608 3,536,804 3,492,981 3,476,502 3,572,589 3,562,064 
6,933,654 7,253,686 7,262,327 7,441,500 7,723,535 8,007,687 8,289,921 8,599,100 8,616,600 8,908,600 9,241,700 9,564,800 9,795,500 10,136,400 10,332,500 10,504,300 10,784,400 11,068,000 11,389,800 11,803,400 12,136,800 12,652,700 13,055,000 13,317,900 13,553,500 13,823,600 13,970,900 14,184,800 14,446,600 14,477,200 14,173,700 14,069,800 14,104,200 14,317,400 14,417,800 14,611,600 14,821,700 15,224,100 15,555,500 15,839,100 16,011,800 16,123,100 16,182,100 16,472,700 16,654,900 16,663,600 16,468,100 16,453,900 
18,506,572 18,764,789 18,608,424 18,598,697 19,103,392 19,300,726 19,682,987 19,949,100 19,927,800 19,816,100 20,242,800 20,645,900 20,668,900 20,989,000 21,201,300 21,315,300 21,640,800 22,061,400 22,059,000 22,181,800 22,327,000 22,414,600 22,615,800 22,810,800 22,928,600 23,170,700 23,247,700 23,477,300 23,665,400 23,476,900 22,736,400 22,495,400 22,487,700 22,563,500 22,661,000 22,870,100 22,994,700 23,412,300 23,828,600 24,132,200 24,282,900 24,373,000 24,411,600 24,788,700 25,026,400 24,938,100 24,222,500 24,046,800 
60 

========60========

I.3 CAPITAL STOCK 
The  net  stock  of  capital  assets  is  obtained  by  subtracting  the  cumulated  sum  of  the  depreciation levels  relative to the period [(t-xV), t] from the flows of gross investments in the year  t, where V is the average service life of the assets and x is a dispersion measure. Each  year, the  depreciations are calculated by applying at every new vintage of investment installed in the period  [(t-xV),  (t-1)]  the  same  decay  function  used  by  ISTAT,  i.e.  a  variant  of  a  truncated  normal  distribution. 
The ISTAT methodology (Lupi and Mantegazza 1994) basically requires to set a rule for the  progressive  retirement  of  capital  goods  installed  at  every  period  and  for  the  yearly  depreciation  pattern  of  the  surviving goods.  Among  the  possible  options  considered  in  the  literature  (OECD  2009), we have followed a normal density function to model the probability of retirement over the  average  productive  life  assumed  for  a  single  capital  good  and  a  liner  rule  for  depreciation.  It  is  worth mentioning that the linear rule for depreciation is meant to allow a full decay of productive  service extracted from a given wave of investment over the full range of time it remains in place;  accordingly, again for a given wave of capital spending, the depreciation rate turns constant over  the  productive  life conditional  on  the  asset  remaining  in  place.  However,  this  rule  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  depreciation  rate  is  constant  over  time due  to  the  combination  of  a  possible  retirement  and  a  changing  intensity  of  accumulation.  For  example,  if  a  huge  capital  formation in a number of years dramatically levels off in subsequent periods, the depreciation rate  typically shows a declining trend; on the contrary, only in the unrealistic case that the accumulation is stationary, could we reasonably expect a constant depreciation rate over time. Indeed, the latter  assumption is maintained in the seminal paper of Rossi and Pagliano (1992), who first obtained data  for the capital stock in Italy since 1951, by adopting, for the overall period, the depreciation rate  implied in the ISTAT figure of capital stock for the year 1980.33 Among other available sources, in  Ercolani (1969) capital stock is estimated for  the  years 1881 -1952 following by and large the same 
approach  as applied here ;  Rossi,  Sorgato  and  Toniolo  (1993)  provided  fresh  estimates  of  capital  
stocks for  the  years 1890 -1951 based on new data for investment and the same depreciation rates  
implied  in  Ercolani,  while  preserving  Rossi  and  Pagliano ‘s data  for  the  period  since  1951.  We  believe that it is worthwhile to harmonize the methodology over the full time horizon, and for these  reasons we have made some efforts to estimate a very long series for investments in order to pursue  a fully fledged application of the perpetual inventory method. 
In  order  to  apply  this  procedure,  the  first  step  was thus  that  of reconstructing ―long‖  investment series which go back to at least the year 1861-xV. In particular,  
a) Investments in constructions from 1730 to 1861 are estimated b y holding the ratio to  population (from Ercolani 1969), computed on average in the years 1861-66, constant; from 1861 to  1951  by  following  the  dynamics  in Vitali (1969);  from  1951  to  1970  by  using  the  dynamics  in  Golinelli and Monterastelli (1990); from 1970 through to 2009 by using ISTAT‘s national accounts  estimates. 
b) Investments in machinery and equipment are estimated in the same way as a), with  the difference that from 1800 to 1861 the ratio of investments to GDP (and not population) is kept  stable to that in 1861-1866. 
c) Investments in means of transport are constructed in the same way as b), with the  only difference that the first year of estimation is 1820. 
For all assets, since 1861 we adopt the  new estimates of gross capital formation computed  by  Baffigi (2011).  We  take  care  to  adjust  the  capital  stock  for  war  destruction by  temporarily  
                                                  
33 
In particular, the depreciation rate was measured by the ratio of the level value of depreciation in 1981 to the level  value of net capital stock in 1980. 
61 

========61========

augmenting  the  probability  of  retirement  in  wartime  so  much  that  the  value  of  the  extra  retired  assets equals the overall damage estimated by Ercolani (1969). 
In Table A5 we report our estimates at chained values with reference year 2010 prices since  
1861. 
TABLE A5. Estimates of net capital stock in Italy, 1861-2010 
(chained values; 2010 reference year; millions of euros) 
Years 
Machinery  
and  Equipment 
3417.4 
3450.8 
3489.7 
3600.3 
3816.8 
4037.6 
4265.1 
4491.5 
4691.2 
4937.7 
5388.3 
6015.3 
6706.4 
7572 
8281.3 
8894.2 
9408.7 
9940.4 
10301 
10818 
11303 
11738 
12106 
12509 
12746 
13283 
13647 
14505 
14921 
15055 
15047 
14901 
14755 
14816 
14955 
15277 
15723 
16225 
16886 
Means of  Transport 
1861 1862 1863 1864 1865 1866 1867 1868 1869 1870 1871 1872 1873 1874 1875 1876 1877 1878 1879 1880 1881 1882 1883 1884 1885 1886 1887 1888 1889 1890 1891 1892 1893 1894 1895 1896 1897 1898 1899 
Construction 
651.58 658.79 667.43 694.54 748.49 802.23 856.12 907.91 
951 1004.6 1109.2 1256.5 1416.3 1616.7 1771.2 1896.3 1992.4 2090.5 2141.9 2232.6 2313.1 2379.3 2428.3 2487.8 2507.8 2610.8 2673.3 2868.4 2949.7 2960 2934.8 2875.5 2818.2 2816.4 2835.7 2902.8 3002.7 3117 3273.6 
90211 91496 92872 94114 95285 95478 95057 94571 94159 93960 93866 94191 94924 96100 96563 96985 97344 97763 98364 99285 100423 102211 104578 107204 109956 112661 115366 118007 120084 122162 124203 126078 127774 129523 129910 129942 129995 129936 129871 
Of which: Residential 
20617 
21110 
21438 
21866 
22100 
22098 
22106 
22014 
22061 
22029 
22151 
22320 
22717 
23349 
23668 
23962 
24230 
24457 
24660 
24909 
25296 
25876 
26458 
27111 
27932 
28735 
29211 
29343 
29480 
29906 
30493 
30985 
31676 
32337 
32880 
33434 
33975 
34491 
34979 
Non- residential 
67253 
68044 
69053 
69858 
70753 
70938 
70547 
70177 
69764 
69610 
69429 
69597 
69957 
70536 
70711 
70869 
70989 
71198 
71594 
72248 
72992 
74180 
75901 
77804 
79688 
81543 
83663 
86002 
87816 
89398 
90817 
92158 
93175 
94264 
94193 
93786 
93409 
92949 
92505 
Total 
72346 73310 74365 75602 77193 78175 78700 79134 79502 80227 81803 84075 86739 90343 92969 95301 97289 99362 100923 103239 105555 108123 110861 113896 116471 120039 123030 127636 130374 132191 133513 134280 134934 136290 136992 138093 139653 141342 143625 
62 

========62========

1900 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914 1915 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 
17688 18900 20195 21475 23194 25931 29186 31957 33997 35543 36764 37362 37044 36563 36089 34260 31343 28512 25554 22902 20760 19162 18483 18464 18133 18061 18397 19206 20112 21177 22112 23138 25063 27087 28655 30823 34594 36155 38358 41333 42974 44200 43264 43703 47160 51247 55604 57022 57409 
3467.1 3765.9 4081.4 4385.3 4791.7 5445.3 6209.6 6823.8 7227.9 7489.6 7658.1 7660.4 7427.2 7160.9 6909.6 6325.6 5491.1 4721.4 3967 3343.7 2901.7 2640.5 2645 2832.7 2938.7 3102.8 3353.9 3698.9 4031 4361 4611.1 4841.8 5268.1 5688.4 5970.9 6400.4 7240.5 7501.2 7932.1 8562.3 8841.6 9013.3 8651.5 8679.3 9487 10419 11374 11562 11494 
130086 130674 131969 133715 135949 138766 141892 145531 149998 155801 163126 170363 177259 183854 191010 194136 193013 190177 186991 186113 185529 186563 190924 196926 203275 208865 214698 220037 225013 233794 245504 256147 266385 278198 291105 306030 318904 326076 330570 336377 341039 343128 340633 333137 324636 319696 326846 334831 342671 
35520 36235 37228 38524 40103 41886 43485 45199 47089 49345 52129 54684 57136 59490 62060 62532 61553 60437 59306 58721 58201 58070 59095 61196 64456 68242 71645 73997 76303 81263 87501 93066 97830 102549 109182 118812 127618 132484 135583 138265 139271 138888 137056 133608 129954 127453 128229 128161 129374 
92279 92256 92662 93239 94039 95213 96823 98813 101427 104979 109511 114148 118557 122768 127328 129790 129499 127777 125753 125400 125262 126291 129464 133334 136691 138996 141794 144903 147722 152047 158075 163635 169409 176622 183450 189946 195205 198193 200055 203387 206894 209098 208266 204146 199276 196741 202627 209860 216052 
146632 151388 156887 162497 169911 181274 194806 206919 216858 225854 234680 241285 244472 246995 249996 245549 234084 221543 208679 199405 192350 188529 190028 194560 198036 202012 207662 214560 221359 231281 242738 253552 266807 281355 295243 312349 333207 343058 353167 366882 375192 380354 375264 371364 375608 380615 395708 404438 410716 
63 

========63========

1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 
57984 62013 66107 70488 75320 80865 87366 93707 99874 106953 115705 125529 137084 149125 158539 166050 171937 178213 185026 193515 203150 216808 232591 249918 272532 295142 309760 326797 344373 362122 385414 413177 433519 449792 462448 479133 495489 512855 535462 565254 594837 625230 655397 681490 690895 705097 723997 743607 766116 
102338 106199 111395 116694 120355 123798 123004 122475 125728 129274 132417 
11492 12399 13316 14092 15180 16386 17538 18840 19959 21035 22624 25124 28076 31041 34002 37015 40489 42765 45630 48937 52064 55360 58431 61349 63966 66022 67363 69569 72267 73615 76297 80719 86037 89972 92063 94633 97112 99268 
351805 363681 378496 397689 421940 450712 486079 523309 566654 614492 667389 724519 786985 858479 935394 1015471 1092774 1170729 1256899 1353296 1462496 1567729 1667379 1766778 1867097 1969194 2065648 2151661 2237190 2322089 2405313 2489256 2572628 2649614 2725588 2799378 2870786 2942581 3012218 3083478 3158746 3238406 3317541 3391491 3452137 3503580 3557823 3611959 3662123 
131743 136842 143148 151613 162482 176212 193996 214148 237790 262480 289685 317503 348413 385306 427586 473839 517791 561369 608316 662287 723121 781059 836891 889642 940641 991580 1038604 1079404 1119296 1157977 1197626 1239192 1279686 1316137 1354786 1392966 1428108 1460248 1490162 1520405 1551392 1583887 1617449 1650813 1682271 1711893 1740882 1767536 1791703 
222575 229599 238388 249397 263070 278361 296150 313351 333150 356491 382403 412044 443918 478705 513373 547093 580528 615124 654672 697340 745937 793429 837462 884490 934331 986135 1036388 1082580 1129308 1176760 1221388 1264688 1308578 1350192 1388524 1425150 1462570 1503553 1544696 1587188 1633022 1681797 1728972 1771105 1801711 1824916 1851663 1880742 1908397 
418553 438686 461167 487217 518714 555368 599030 644016 692954 747292 810185 880452 959399 1046363 1132335 1217134 1297845 1377853 1466533 1567624 1681398 1799902 1917357 2037070 2166100 2295517 2406024 2512599 2620175 2725657 2839573 2962313 3074221 3172762 3263381 3357816 3449544 3542634 3641565 3752201 3867354 3987641 4104372 4210521 4280496 4347328 4426054 4506021 4585072 
64 

========64========

1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 
792486 819020 850574 878496 904584 924246 944226 964276 988413 1014690 1031842 1029156 1035625 
138639 147593 156800 167363 178419 185109 191482 196229 201013 205049 207207 203326 201408 
3709990 3759589 3815349 3875457 3942440 4011006 4080802 4148901 4216320 4281878 4339793 4380632 4413753 
1814318 1836847 1861438 1886060 1911208 1937769 1965434 1996045 2028774 2061013 2091246 2112852 2131878 
1935361 1964199 1997196 2034591 2078414 2122430 2166600 2206139 2242886 2278288 2308053 2329384 2345580 
4669735 4759280 4860690 4963595 5071683 5169165 5267802 5363071 5461821 5560105 5639507 5675736 5715525 
65 

========65========

I.4  WAGE DATA 
Wage data were collected, and pieced together, for four main sectors: agriculture, industry,  private services and PA. Until 1951 mainly data taken from scholarly studies were used; after 1951  official data sources were consulted. 
For agriculture, from 1861 to 1951, we linked together data from Fenoaltea (2002), Arcari  (1936), Zamagni (1981) and Annuario Statistico della Agricoltura Italiana. For industry we used:  Fenoaltea (2002), Zamagni (1995) and Annuario Statistico Italiano. For private services, we only  had data on staff expenditure in the transport and communications sector, from Annuario Statistico  Italiano, which we assumed to be representative wages for the overall sub-sector. For PA, we took  the average wage of civil servants of intermediate rank (applicato) from ISTAT (1968) and Ercolani  (1969). 
For the period 1951-1970, data on earned income for all sectors were taken from Golinelli  (1998). For the period 1970-2010, ISTAT (2011) was used. 
II. OTHER COUNTRIES 
II.1 UNITED KINGDOM 
The  UK  time  series  are  taken  largely  from  the  historical  national  accounts  of  Feinstein  (1972), updated with output estimates from the UK National Accounts and employment data from  the  EU KLEMS  database. Capital  stock  estimates  are  from:  Feinstein  (1988)  for  1871-1920,  Feinstein  (1972) 1920-1965;    U.K.  Central  Statistical  Office (various  issues) for  1965-1990; EU  KLEMS database for 1990-2007.  Similarly to Feinstein (1972), the territory covered refers to the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  the  whole  of  Ireland  before  1920,  but  Great  Britain  and  Northern Ireland after 1920. 
II.2 UNITED STATES 
Data  on  output  by  industry  are  taken  from:    Kendrick  (1961)  for 1869-1948;    U.S.  Department of Commerce (1983) for 1948-1979; U.S. Department of Commerce (various issues b)  for 1979-1990. Figures on employment by industry are taken from: Kendrick (1961) for 1869-1948;  U.S.  Department of  Commerce  (1983)  for  1948-1979;  U.S.  Department  of  Commerce  (various  issues a) for 1979-1990; Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Labour Force  Statistics (various issues). These sources were used in Broadberry (1998). Capital stock estimates  are taken from: Gallman (1987) for 1869-1899; Kendrick (1961) for 1899-1929, U.S. Department  of Commerce (1987) for 1929-1985; U.S. Department of Commerce (various issues b) for 1985- 1990. These sources were used by Broadberry (1998). All data were then updated by using the EU  KLEMS database for 1990-2007. 
II.3 GERMANY 
Data  on  output  by  industry  are  taken  from:  Hoffmann  (1965)  for  1871-1959  and Statistisches Bundesamt (1991) for 1959-1985. Figures on employment by industry are taken from:  Hoffmann (1965) for 1871-1959;  Statistisches Bundesamt (1991), Statistisches Bundesamt (1988)  and  Organisation for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (various  issues) for  1959-1985. Capital stock estimates are taken from: Hoffmann (1965) for 1871-1950, Kirner (1968) for 1950- 1960; Statistisches Bundesamt for 1960-1990. These data were used in Broadberry (1998). All data  were then updated by using the EU KLEMS database for 1990-2007. As in Hoffman (1965), data  refer to the following territories: 1871-1917 the territories of the German Reich, including Alsace- Lorraine; 1918-1944 the territories of the German Reich excluding Austria and the Sudetenland, but  from 1934 including the Saar; 1945-1959 the territories of the German Federal Republic excluding  West Berlin and the Saar; 1960-1990 the Federal Republic including West Berlin and the Saar. Note  
66 

========66========

that  the  1990  data  exclude  the  new  Laender  from  the  former  German  Democratic  Republic. For  1990-2007 Germany at current boundaries is considered. 
II.4 INDIA 
We rely largely on historical national accounts reconstructed by Heston (1983) for the late  nineteenth century and  by Sivasubramoniam (2000) for the twentieth century, for data on output  and employment. Capital stock estimates are from van Leeuwen (2007), derived from Roy (1996),  for the period 1890/91-1950/51 and from Sivasubramonian (2004) for the period 1950/51-1999/00.  These sources have been used by Broadberry and Gupta (2010). The data are generally presented on  a fiscal year basis, running from 1 April to 31 March, and refer to the boundaries of British India  until 1946/47 and modern India thereafter. 
II.5 JAPAN 
The sources used for output are: Ohkawa, Takamatsu and Mamamoto (1974) for 1885-1940;  Japan Statistical Yearbook (1963) and Pilat (1994) for 1940-1953; Ohkawa and Shinohara (1979)  for  1953-1970;  Historical  Statistics  of  Japan (http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/chouki/03.htm); Annual Report on National Accounts, 2010, for 1998-2008. The sources used for employment are  instead the following: Ohkawa (1957) for the period 1885-1940; Ohkawa and Rosovsky (1973) for  the period 1941-1970; Pilat (1994) for 1971-1991; Annual Report on National Accounts, 2010 for  the period 1997-2008 (http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/sna/h20-). These sources were originally used  by Broadberry, Fukao and Gupta (2010). 
67 

========67========

B. Methodological Appendix 
As well as growth rates in different countries, in Section 4 we also presented comparative  levels of labour productivity. In this Appendix we explain the methodology used to construct these  
levels in index number form. 
To  pin  down  the  comparative  labour  productivity  level,  we  used a  cross-sectional  benchmark for 1997, derived from the EU KLEMS database. The benchmark is estimated from data  on nominal value added (i.e. in national currency), deflated by relative sector-specific price ratios  adjusted in line with purchasing power parity (PPPs), per person engaged in each country.34 This  deflation  procedure  is  necessary  since  the  exchange  rate  cannot  be  assumed  to  accurately  reflect  
differences  in  prices  between  different  countries,  especially  a services, or particular sectors.  In principle, p 
movements,  barriers t o trade,  been known to be subject to substantial short 
t  the  level  of  individual  goods  and  
rice discrepancies converge to zero in sectors open to  international  trade,  yet  different  degrees  of  monopoly  power,  lags  in  response  to  exchange  rate  
etc. may fuel persistent differences. 
-term fluctuations and  
thus  becoming  misleading  converters  to  a  common  currency,  even  for  tradeabl 
-country comparisons, value measures must  
services. 
35 
In the case of cross 
differences in relative prices between countries. Furthermore, sector since large cross -sector differences in PPPs can 
pp. 16 -7). 
36 
The PPP for services in Italy is however believed to be underestimated 
very high labour productivity level  m arket services 
for that sector  
Furthermore, exchange rates have  
international  capital movements,  
e  goods  and  
hence  be corrected for  
-specific PPPs are to be used,  be shown to exist (e.g. Inkla ar and Timmer 2008,  
, as it leads to a  in the international context, especially in the non 
- 
‘ sector, which is difficult to justify given the existing literature on the subject.37 The  EU -KLEMS PPP for services has thus been replaced by the geometric mean of the PPP for industry  
and  of  the  PPP  for  agriculture.  In  turn,  the  PPP  for  the weighted average of the three sector -specific PPPs 
The time series of labour productivity are  1997 benchmark thus built 
total  economy  has  been  computed  as  a  . 
then projected, backwards and forwards, from the  
; Ward and Devereux  
. A number of studies (Prados de la Escosura 2000 
2003) have questioned the use of time series projections from a single benchmark over long periods  
of time, the methodology used here, which potentially raises index number problems. The issue  
y (2003) and Ward and Devereux (2004). The problem may  
the subject of debate between Broadberr be mitigated by using additional benchmark estimates  
wa s  
– for earlier and later years – to check for  
consistency  with  the  comparative  labour  productivity  levels  suggested  by  the  time  series  projections. In fact, Broadberry (1993) had already suggested the use of additional benchmarks to  provide  cross-checks  in  a  study  of  comparative  productivity  in  manufacturing,  while  Broadberry  (1997a; 1997b; 1998; 2006) applied the method to full sectoral productivity comparisons over the  period 1870-1990 for the United Kingdom with the United States and Germany, and found broad  agreement between the benchmarks and time series evidence for those countries. Broadberry and  Irwin (2006; 2007) find similar agreement between time series projections and benchmarks for the  United  Kingdom  compared  with  the  United  States  in  the  nineteenth  century  and  the  United  Kingdom  compared  with  Australia  over  the  period  1861-1948.  More  recently,  Broadberry  and  
                                                  
34 
PPP can be defined as ―the number of currency units required to buy the goods equivalent to what can be bought with  one unit of currency of a base country‖ (Kravis, Heston and Summers 1982). 
35 
See for example Taylor and Taylor (2004) for a review of the debate on PPP. 
griculture,  mining,  manufacturing  
36 
In  particular,  the  PPPs  provided  by  EU  KLEMS  include  production  PPPS  for  a (except high 
Timmer  
-tech), transport, communication and trade industries and expenditure PPPs for all remaining sectors. See  
et al. (2007) for a discussion on the advantages and drawbacks of the different types of PPP. 
37 
See for example Bripi, Carmingnani and Giordano (2011) for a survey of studies on the (poor) quality and efficiency  
of public services in Italy in recent years in an international context. 
68 

========68========

Gupta (2010) have applied the same methodology  to an Anglo-Indian comparison between 1870  and 2000 and Broadberry, Fukao and Gupta (2010) to an Anglo-Japanese comparison between 1870  and  2007.  We  thus  proceed  in  the  same  way  here  to  provide  some  additional  corroboration  and  conclude that,  although  index number problems do exist, with careful treatment of the data time  series projections from a fixed benchmark can tell a consistent story. 
In particular, we compare our time-series projections to existing direct benchmarks built in  previous studies, presented in Table B1. The first benchmark in order of time refers to 1905 and is  taken from Broadberry and Klein (2008). The PPPs are in turn taken from a study by Williamson  (1995)  and  are  based  on  the  prices  of  a  basket  of  consumption  goods.  This  is  not  ideal  because  national income includes other items of expenditure besides consumption; however consumption is  the most relevant item. Furthermore, the benchmark refers to per capita income and not precisely to  aggregate  labour  productivity.  However,  the  two  measures  are  known  to  be  strictly  related.  The  difference between the benchmark and our projection is relatively small, which is reassuring given  the claims of inevitable  large disagreements between time series projections and direct estimates  made  by  Ward  and  Devereux  (2003). O‘Brien  and  Toniolo  (1991)  produce  a  direct  estimate  for  agriculture  in  1910.  It  is  based  on  comparative  FTE  labour  input  in  UK/Italy.  It  is,  however,  assumed to be similar to the HC labour input comparative ratio in the same sector. As Table B1  shows, in 1910, too, the time projection differs only 1.5% from the direct estimate. In conclusion,  our time series projections from a 1997 benchmark substantially agree with existing direct estimates  in 1905 and 1910, which further corroborates our projection from a fixed benchmark technique.  
For recent years, OECD provides data on internationally comparable real GDP per capita.  We  can thus compare  our  comparative  Italy-UK  labour  productivity  estimate  for  2007,  the  only  overlapping year, with these data. The comparison is again presented in Table B1, from which it is  clear  that  our  forward  time-series  projection  is  also  relatively  close  to  the  OECD  results.  In  conclusion, although time-series projections from a fixed benchmark are not devoid of problems,  especially  given  the  long  time-span  of  our  study, we  are  reassured  by  the  fact  that  our  resulting  estimates are similar to existing direct benchmarks or to other internationally sourced estimates. 
69 

========69========

TABLE B1. Benchmark Cross-Checks on Time-Series Projections 
. 
Years 
1905 1910 2007 
Direct  benchmarks 
43.7 
43.0 
83.8 
Time series  projections 
38.5 
42.4 
89.6 
Sources: Broadberry  and  Klein  (2008)  for  1905;  O‘Brien  and  Toniolo  (1991)  for  1910; OECD (2011) for 2007. 
Note: The first  and  third  are direct  estimates of  GDP  per head; the second is  a  direct estimate of male FTE labour productivity in agriculture. 
70 

========70========

References 
Abramovitz, M. (1986), ―Catching Up, Forging Ahead and Falling Behind‖, Journal of Economic History,  
46, pp. 385-406. 
Aiyar, S. and Dalgaard, C-J. (2005), "Total Factor Productivity Revisited: a Dual Approach to Development  
Accounting", IMF Staff Papers, 52, pp. 82-102. 
Antonelli,  C.  and  Barbiellini  Amidei,  F.  (2007),  ―Innovazione  tecnologica  e  mutamento  strutturale  
dell‘industria italiana nel secondo dopoguerra‖ in Antonelli, C., Barbiellini Amidei, F., Giannetti, R.,  
Gomellini,  M.,  Pastorelli,  S.  and  Pianta,  M.,  Innovazione  tecnologica  e  sviluppo  industriale  nel  
secondo dopoguerra, Roma-Bari: Editori Laterza. 
Arcari, P.M. (1936), ―Le variazioni dei salari agricoli in Italia dalla fondazione del Regno al 1933‖, Annali di  
statistica, series 6, vol. XXXVI, Roma. 
Assonime, Bollettino di Notizie Economiche, various years. 
Baffigi,  A.  (2011),  ―Italy‘s  Historical  National  Accounts,  1861-2010‖, Banca  d’Italia  Quaderni  di  Storia  
Economica, October, forthcoming. 
Banca d‘Italia (1938), L'economia italiana nel sessennio 1931-1936, Roma: Officina Poligrafica dello Stato. 
———— (2009), “Reports on Trends in the Italian Productive System‖, Banca d’Italia Occasional Papers, 
n. 45. 
Basu, S. and Fernald, J.G. (1997), ―Aggregate Productivity and Aggregate Technology‖, Board of Governors  
of the Federal Reserve System International Finance Discussion Paper no. 593. 
Battilani, P., Bertagnoni, G. and Vignini, S. (2008), Un’impresa di cooperatori, artigiani, camionisti. La Cta  
e il trasporto merci in Italia, Il Mulino: Bologna. 
Baumol, W.J. (1986), ―Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the Long Run Data Show‖,  
American Economic Review, 76, pp. 1072-1159. 
Bosworth,  B.  and  Collins,  S.  (2008),  ―Accounting  for  Growth:  Comparing  China  and  India‖, Journal  of  
Economic Perspectives, 22(1), pp. 45-66. 
Bripi, F., Carmignani, A. and Giordano, R. (2011), ―La qualità dei servizi pubblici in Italia‖, Banca d’Italia  
Occasional Papers, n. 84. 
Broadberry, S.N. (1997a), ―Forging Ahead, Falling Behind and Catching Up: A Sectoral Analysis of Anglo- 
American Productivity Differences, 1870-1990‖, Research in Economic History, 17, pp. 1-37. 
———— (1997b),  ―Anglo-German  Productivity  Differences  1870-1990:  A  Sectoral  Analysis‖, European  
Review of Economic History, 1, pp. 247-267. 
———— (1998),  ―How  did  the  United  States  and  Germany  Overtake  Britain?  A  Sectoral  Analysis  of  
Comparative Productivity Levels, 1870-1990‖, Journal of Economic History, 58, pp. 375-407. 
———— (2003), ―Relative Per Capita Income Levels in the United Kingdom and the United States since  
1870:  Reconciling  Time-Series  Projections  and  Direct-Benchmark  Estimates‖,  Journal  of  
Economic History, 63, pp. 852-863. 
71 

========71========

———— (2006),  Market  Services  and  the  Productivity  Race,  1850-2000:  British  Performance  in  
International Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Broadberry, S.N., Federico, G. and Klein, A. (2010), ―Sectoral developments, 1870-1914‖, in Broadberry, S.  
and O‘Rourke, K.H. (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Europe. Volume 2: 1870  
to the Present, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Broadberry,  S.N.,  Fukao,  K.  and  Gupta,  B.  (2010),  ―How  Did  Japan  Catch-Up  on  the  West?  A  Sectoral  
Analysis of Anglo-Japanese Productivity Differences, 1885-2000‖, mimeo 
Broadberry, S.N. and Gupta, B. (2010), ―The historical roots of India‘s service-led development: A sectoral  
analysis of Anglo-Indian productivity differences, 1870–2000‖, Explorations in Economic History,  
47 (3), pp. 264-278. 
Broadberry, S.N. and Irwin, D.A. (2006), ―Labour Productivity in Britain and America during the Nineteenth  
Century‖, Explorations in Economic History,  43, pp. 257-279. 
———— (2007), ―Lost Exceptionalism? Comparative Income and Productivity in Australia and the United  
Kingdom, 1861-1948‖, Economic Record, 83, pp. 262-274. 
Broadberry, S.N. and Klein, A. (2008), ―Aggregate and Per Capita GDP in Europe, 1870-2000: Continental,  
Regional and National Data with Changing Boundaries‖, University of Warwick, mimeo. 
Carreras, A. and Josephson, C. (2010), ―Growing at the Production Frontier: European Aggregate Growth,  
1870-1914‖, in Broadberry, S. and O‘Rourke, K.H. (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History of  
Modern Europe. Volume 2: 1870 to the Present,  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Carriero, G., Ciocca, P. and Marcucci, M. (2003), ―Diritto e risultanze dell‘economia nell‘Italia unita‖ in P.  
Ciocca  and  G.  Toniolo  (eds.), Storia  Economica  d’Italia.  3.  Industrie,  mercati,  istituzioni.  2.  I  
vincoli e le opportunità , Roma-Bari: Laterza. 
Cerrito,  E.  (2003),  ―Depressioni.  Caratteri  e  genesi  della  depressione  di  fine  XIX secolo,  più  altre  tre  (e  
un‘altra ancora), Studi Storici, 44, pp. 927-1005. 
Chandler,  A.D.,  Jr.  (1990),  Scale  and  Scope:  The  Dynamics  of  Industrial  Capitalism,  Cambridge,  MA:  
Harvard University Press. 
Chiaventi,  R.  (1987),  "I  censimenti  industriali  italiani  1911-1951:  procedimenti  di  standardizzazione",  
Rivista di Storia Economica , 4(1), pp. 119-151. 
Clark, C. (1951), The Conditions of Economic Progress , (second edition), London: Macmillan. 
Comin, D. and Hobijn, B. (2010), ―Technology Diffusion and Postwar Growth‖, Harvard Business School  
Working Paper, No. 11-027. 
Contessa, A.M. and De Mattia, A. (1993), ―L‘organizzazione della Banca d‘Italia. 1893-1947‖, in Ricerche  
per la storia della Banca d’Italia. Volume IV, Roma-Bari: Editori Laterza:. 
Crafts, M.  and  Magnani,  M.  (2011) , ―The  Golden  Age  and  the  Second  Globalization  in  Italy‖,  Banca  
d’Italia Quaderni di Storia Economica, October, forthcoming. 
Crafts, N. and Toniolo, G. (2010), ―Aggregate Growth, 1950-2005‖, in Broadberry, S. and O‘Rourke, K.H.  
(eds.),  The  Cambridge  Economic  History  of  Modern  Europe.  Volume  2:  1870  to  the  Present,  
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
72 

========72========

Daniele, V. and Malanima, P. (2009), ―Labour Supply in Italy 1861-2001. Structural Change and Regional  
Disparities‖, Quaderni Istituto di studi sulle società del mediterraneo, n.141. 
Denison, E. (1967), Why Growth Rates Differ: Postwar Experience in Nine Western Countries, Washington  
DC: The Brookings Institution. 
———— (1968),  ―Economic  Growth‖,  in  Caves,  R.  E  and  Associates,  Britain’s  Economic  Prospects,  
Washington DC: The Brookings Institution. 
Direzione della Statistica Generale del Regno (1867), Censimento Generale (31 dicembre 1861), Firenze. 
Direzione generale della statistica, Annuario statistico italiano, various years, Roma. 
Ellena,  V.  (1880),  ―La  statistica  di  alcune  industrie  italiane‖,  in  Ministero  d‘Agricoltura,  Industria  e  
Commercio, Annali di Statistica. Serie 2°-Vol. 13, Roma. 
Ercolani, P. (1969), ―Documentazione statistica di base‖, in Fuà, G. (ed.), Lo sviluppo economico in Italia.  
Volume III- Studi di settore e Documentazione di base, Milano: Franco Angeli Editore. 
EU KLEMS Database, March 2008, http://www.euklems.net/data. 
Federico, G. (2003), ―La struttura industriale (1911-1996)‖ in Giannetti, R. and Vasta, M. (eds.), L'impresa  
italiana nel Novecento, Bologna: Il Mulino. 
————    (2005), Feeding the World. An Economic History of Agriculture, 1800-2000, Princeton: Princeton  
University Press. 
Federico,  G.  and  Malanima,  P.  (2004),  ―Progress,  decline,  growth:  product  and  productivity  in  Italian  
agriculture, 1000-2000‖, Economic History Review, LVII, 3, pp. 437–464. 
Federico, G. and O‘Rourke, K. (2000), ―Much Ado About Nothing? Italian trade policy in the late nineteenth  
century‖, in Pamuk, S. and Williamson, J. G. (eds.), The Mediterranean Response to Globalisation  
before 1950, London: Routledge. 
Feinstein,  C.H.  (1972),  National  Income,  Expenditure  and  Output  of  the  United  Kingdom,  1855-1965,  
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
———— (1988), "Sources and Methods of Estimation for Domestic Reproducible Fixed Assets, Stocks and  
Works in Progress, Overseas Assets and Land", in Feinstein, C.H. and Pollard, S. (eds.), Studies in  
Capital Formation in the United Kingdom, 1750-1920, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Fenoaltea, S. (2001), ―La crescita industriale delle regioni d‘Italia dall‘Unità alla Grande Guerra: una prima  
stima per gli anni censuari‖, Quaderni dell’Ufficio Ricerche Storiche, n. 1, June. 
———— (2002),  "Production  and  Consumption  in  Post-Unification  Italy:  New  Evidence,  New  
Conjectures", Rivista di Storia Economica, 3, pp. 251-299. 
———— (2005), ―The  Growth  of  the  Italian  Economy,  1861-1913:  Preliminary  Second-Generation  
Estimates‖, European Review of Economic History VIII , 3 , pp. 273-312. 
———— (2006), L’economia italiana dall’Unità alla Grande Guerra, Roma-Bari: Laterza. 
Fuà, G. and Scuppa, S. (1988), ―Industrializzazione e deindustrializzazione delle regioni italiane secondo i  
censimenti demografici 1881-1981‖, Economia Marche, n. 3, pp. 307-328. 
73 

========73========

Gallman, R.E. (1987), "Investment Flows and Capital Stocks: U.S. Experience in the Nineteenth Century", in  
Kilby,  P.  (ed.),  Quantity  and  Quiddity:  Essays  in  US.  Economic  History,  Middletown,  CT:  
Wesleyan University Press. 
Gerschenkron,  A.  (1962),  Economic  Backwardness  in  Historical  Perspective,  Cambridge,  MA:  Harvard  
University Press. 
Golinelli,  R.  (1998), La  ricostruzione  dei  dati  di  contabilità  nazionale.  Metodi  e  confronti,  Università  di  
Bologna, mimeo. 
Golinelli, R. and Monterastelli, M. (1990), ―Un metodo per la ricostruzione di serie storiche compatibili con  
la nuova contabilità nazionale (1951 - 1989)‖, Note di Lavoro, Bologna: Prometeia Associazione. 
Heston, A. (1983), ―National Income‖ in Kumar, D. and Desai, M. (eds.), The Cambridge Economic History  
of India, Volume 2: c. 1757-c. 1970, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Heston,  A.,  Summers,  R.  and  Aten,  B.  (2011),  Penn  World  Table  Version  7.0,  Center  for  International  
Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania. 
Hoffmann,  W.  G.  (1965),  Das  Wachstum der  deutschen  Wirtschaft  seit  der  Mitte  des  19.  Jahrhunderts,  
Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Hounshell D.A. (1984), From the American System to Mass Production, 1800-1932, Baltimore, MD: Johns  
Hopkins University Press. 
INEA (1933), Monografie di famiglie agricole, Roma. 
Inklaar, R. and Timmer, M.P. (2008), ―GGDC Productivity Level Database: International Comparisons of  
Output,  Inputs  and  Productivity  at  the  Industry  Leve l‖,  Research  Memorandum  GD-104,  
Groningen Growth and Development Centre, University of Groningen . 
Istituto Centrale di Statistica del Regno d‘Italia, Annuario Statistico dell’Agricoltura Italiana, various years,  
Roma. 
ISTAT (1956), Annuario Statistico dell’Istruzione Italiana, Roma. 
——— (1968),  Sommario di statistiche storiche italiane, 1861-1965, Roma: ISTAT. 
——— (1973), Annuario di Contabilità Nazionale, Roma. 
———(2011), Conti economici nazionali, http://www.istat.it/dati/dataset/20110415_00 
James, H. and O‘Rourke, K. (2011), ―Italy and the first age of globalization‖, Banca d’Italia Quaderni di  
Storia Economica, October, forthcoming. 
Jorgenson, D. W. (2001), ―Information Technology and the U.S. Economy,‖ American Economic Review, 
91(1), pp. 1-32. 
Kendrick, J. W. (1961), Productivity Trends in the United States, Princeton: National Bureau of Economic  
Research. 
Kindleberger,  C.P.  (1967), European  Postwar  Growth:  The  Role  of  Labor  Supply, Princeton:  National  
Bureau of Economic Research. 
Kindleberger, C.P. (1996), World Economic Primacy, 1500-1990, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
74 

========74========

Kirner,  W.  (1968),  Zeitreihen  für  das  Anlagevermogen  der  Wirtschaftsbereiche  in  der  Bundesrepublik  
Deutschland, Berlin: Duncker& Humblot. 
Kravis, I.B., Heston, A. and Summers, R. (1982), World Product and Income: International Comparisons of  
Real Gross Product, Baltimore-London: The John Hopkins University Press. 
Kuznets,  S.  (1974),  Population,  Capital  and  Economic  Growth:  Selected  Essays,  London:  Heinemann,  
pp.165-184. 
van  Leeuwan,  B.  (2007),  ―Human  Capital  and  Economic  Growth  in  India,  Indonesia  and  Japan:  A  
Quantitative Analysis, 1890-2000‖, PhD Dissertation, Utrecht University. 
Lupi, C. and Mantegazza, S. (1994), ―Ricostruzione delle serie degli investimenti per branca utilizzatrice, per  
branca proprietaria e calcolo dello stock di capitale‖, ISTAT Working Paper, n. 14, Roma. 
Maddison,  A.  (1991),  ―A  Revised  Estimate  of  Italian  Economic  Growth,  1861-1989‖,  BNL  Quarterly  
Review, June, pp. 225-241. 
———— (2003), The World Economy: Historical Statistics, Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation  
and Development. 
Malanima,  P.  (2006),  ―An  Age  of  Decline.  Product and  Income  in  Eighteenth-Nineteenth  Century  Italy‖,  
Rivista di Storia Economica, XXII (1), pp. 91-133. 
———— (2007),  ―Wages,  Productivity  and  Working  Time  in  Italy  (1270-1913),  Journal  of  European  
Economic History, Vol. 36 (1), pp. 127-171. 
Medici, G. and Orlando, G. (1951), Agricoltura e disoccupazione. I braccianti nella bassa padana, Roma:  
INEA. 
Ministero d‘Agricoltura, Industria e Commercio (1875), Censimento 31 dicembre 1871, Roma. 
Ministero  d‘Agricoltura,  Industria  e  Commercio  (1881),  Notizie  Statistiche  sulla  Industria  Mineraria  in  
Italia dal 1860 al 1880, Roma. 
——— (1906), Riassunto delle notizie sulle condizioni industriali del Regno, Roma. 
Ministero delle Corporazioni, Bolletino del Lavoro e della Previdenza Sociale, Roma, various years. 
——— , Sindacato e Corporazione, Roma, various years. 
National Statistics (various years), UK National Accounts, London: HMSO. 
Nordhaus, W.D. (1972), ―The Recent Productivity Slowdown‖, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, n.3,  
pp. 493-545. 
———— (2001),  ―Alternative  Methods  for  Measuring  Productivity  Growth‖, NBER  Working  Paper, n. 
8095. 
O‘Brien, P.K. and Toniolo, G. (1991), ―The poverty of Italy and the backwardness of  its agriculture before  
1914‖, in Campbell, B.M.S. and Overton, M. (eds.), Land, labour and livestock: historical studies  
in European agricultural productivity, Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
OECD (various issues), Labour Force Statistics, Paris: OECD. 
———— (2009), Measuring Capital. OECD Manual, Second Edition, Paris: OECD. 
75 

========75========

———— (2011), OECD.Stat, http://stats.oecd.org. 
Ohkawa, K. (1957), The Growth Rate of the Japanese Economy, Tokyo: Kinokuniya. 
Ohkawa,  K.  and  Rosovsky,  H.  (1973), Japanese  Economic  Growth:  Trend  Acceleration  in  the  Twentieth  
Century, Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
Ohkawa, K. and Shinohara, M. (1979) (eds.), Patterns of Japanese Economic Development: A Quantitative  
Appraisal, New Haven: Yale University Press. 
Ohkawa,  K.,  Takamatsu,  N.  and  Yamamoto,  Y.  (eds.),  (1974),  National  Income,  Tokyo:  Toyo  Keizai  
Shinposha. 
Pagliano, P. and Rossi, N. (1992), ―The Italian Saving Rate: 1951 to 1990 Estimates‖, Banca d’Italia Temi di  
Discussione del Servizio Studi, n. 169. 
Pilat, D. (1994), The Economics of Rapid Growth: The Experience of Japan and Korea, Aldershot: Elgar. 
Prados de la Escosura, L. (2000), ―International comparisons of real product, 1820–1990‖, Explorations in  
Economic History,  37,  pp. 1-41. 
Ragioneria Generale dello Stato, Conto Annuale, various years. 
Rey, G.M. (1991) (ed.), I conti economici dell’Italia. 1. Una sintesi delle fonti ufficiali 1890-1970, Roma- 
Bari: Editori Laterza. 
Rossi, N., Sorgato, A. and Toniolo, G. (1993), ―I conti economici italiani: una ricostruzione statistica, 1890- 
1990‖, Rivista di Storia Economica, X (1), pp. 1-47. 
Rossi, N. and Toniolo, G. (1992), ―Catching up or falling behind? Italy‘s economic  growth, 1895-1947‖,  
Economic History Review, XLV, 3, pp. 537-563. 
———— (1996),  ―Italy‖,  in  Crafts,  N.  and  Toniolo,  G.  (eds.), Economic  Growth  in  Europe  since  1945,  
Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. 
Roy,  B.  (1996), An  Analysis  of  Long  Term  Growth  of  National  Income  and  Capital  Formation  in  India  
(1850-51 to 1950-51), Calcutta: Firma KLM Private. 
Serpieri,  A.  (1910), Il  contratto  agrario  e  le  condizioni  di  vita  dei  contadini  nell’alto  milanese,  Milano:  
Società Umanitaria, Ufficio Agrario. 
Sivasubramonian, S. (2000), The National Income of India in the Twentieth Century, New Delhi: Oxford  
University Press 
———— (2004), The  Sources  of  Economic  Growth  in  India,  1950-1  to  1999-2000, New  Delhi:  Oxford  
University Press. 
Solow, R.M. (1957), ―Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function‖, Review of Economics and  
Statistics, 39 (August), pp. 312-320 
Statistisches Bundesamt (1988), Lange Reihen zur Wirtschaftsentwicklung, Wiesbaden.  
———— (1991),  Volkswirtschaftliche  Gesamtrechnungen  1950  bis  1990.  Fachserie 18,  Reihe  S.15,  
Wiesbaden.  
76 

========76========

Statistics Bureau (1963), Japan Statistical Yearbook, Tokyo: Statistics Bureau. 
Statistics Bureau (n.d.), Historical Statistics of Japan, http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/chouki/index.htm. 
Statistics  Bureau  (n.d.),  Annual  Report  on  National  Accounts,  http://www.esri.cao.go.jp/en/sna/h20- 
kaku/22annual-report-e.html. 
Stiroh, K.J. (2001), ―What Drives Productivity Growth?‖, Economic Policy Review, Federal Reserve Bank of  
New York, March, pp. 37-59 
———— (2002), ―Information Technology and the U.S. Productivity Revival: What do the Industry Data  
Say?‖, American Economic Review, 92(5), pp. 1559-1576. 
Taylor,  A.M.  and  Taylor,M.P.  (2004),  ―The  Purchasing  Power  Parity  Debate‖,  Journal  of  Economic  
Perspectives, 18 (4), pp. 135–158. 
Timmer, M.P., Inklar, R. and O‘Mahony, M. (eds.) (2010), Economic Growth in Europe: A Comparative  
Industry Perspective, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Timmer, M.P., Ypma, G. and van Ark, B. (2007), ―PPPs for industry output: a new dataset for international  
comparisons‖, Working Paper GD-82, Groningen Growth and Development Centre, University of  
Groningen. 
Ufficio dell‘Italia Militare (1864), L’Italia Militare. Rassegna Mensile, 1(1), Torino. 
U.K. Central Statistical Office (various issues), National Income, Expenditure and Output, London. 
U.S. Department of Commerce (1983), National Income and Product Accounts of the United States, 1929- 
1982, Washington, DC.  
———— (1987), Fixed  Reproducible  Tangible  Wealth  in  the  United  States,  1925-85,  Washington,  DC:  
GPO.  
———— (various issues a) Statistical Abstract of the United States, Washington, DC: GPO.  
———— (various issues b), Survey of Current Business, Washington, DC: GPO. 
Vitali,  O.  (1968), La  popolazione  attiva  in  agricoltura  attraverso  i  censimenti  italiani,  Roma:  Istituto  di  
demografia. 
———— (1969), ―La  stima  degli  investimenti  e  dello  stock  di  capitale‖,  in  Fuà,  G.  (ed.),  Lo  sviluppo  
economico  in  Italia.  Volume  III- Studi  di  settore  e  Documentazione  di  base,  Milano:  Franco  
Angeli Editore. 
———— (1970), Aspetti dello sviluppo economico italiano alla luce della ricostruzione della popolazione  
attiva, Roma: Istituto di demografia. 
Ward,  M.  and  Devereux,  J.  (2003),  ―Measuring  British  Decline:  Direct  versus  Long-Span  Income  
Measures‖, Journal of Economic History, 63, pp. 826-851. 
———— (2004),  ―Relative UK/US  Output  Reconsidered:  A  Reply  to  Professor  Broadberry‖, Journal  of  
Economic History, 63, pp. 826-851. 
Williamson,  J.  (1995),  ―The  Evolution  of  Global  Labor  Markets  since  1830:  Background  Evidence  and  
Hypotheses‖, Explorations in Economic History, 32, pp. 141-196. 
77 

========77========

———— (2011),  ―Industrial  Catching-Up in  the  Poor  Periphery  1870-1975‖, NBER  Working  Paper, n.  
16809, February. 
Zamagni,  V.  (1981),  ―Distribuzione  del  reddito  e  classi  sociali  nell'Italia  fra  le  due  guerre‖,  in La  classe  
operaia durante il fascismo. Annali della Fondazione Feltrinelli, Vol. XX, Milano. 
————    (1987), ―A Century of Change: Trends in the Composition of the Italian Labour Force, 1881- 
1981‖, Historical Social Research, 44, pp. 36-97. 
———— (1995), "Appendix: Nominal wages and cost of living series, 19th and 20th centuries.Italy", in  Scholliers, P. and Zamagni, V. (eds.), Labour's reward. Real Wages and Economic Change in 19th and 20th  
century Europe, Hampshire: Edward Elgar:. 
78 

========78========

