November 2011 
No.66 
When bigger isn’t better: bailouts and bank behaviour 
Marcus Miller, Lei Zhang, and Han Hao Li 
University of Warwick 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

When bigger isn’t better: bailouts and bank behaviour1 
Marcus Miller, Lei Zhang, and Han Hao Li 
University of Warwick 
November 2011 
Abstract 
Lending retail deposits to SMEs and household borrowers may be the traditional role of  commercial banks: but banking in Britain has been transformed by increasing consolidation  and by the lure of high returns available from wholesale Investment activities. With  appropriate changes to the baseline model of commercial banking in Allen and Gale (2007),  we show how market power enables banks to collect „seigniorage‟; and how „tail risk‟  investment allows losses to be shifted onto the taxpayer. 
In principle, the high franchise values associated with market power assist regulatory capital  requirements to check risk-taking. But when big banks act strategically, bailout expectations  can undermine these disciplining devices: and the taxpayer ends up „on the hook‟ - as in the  recent crisis. That structural change is needed to prevent a repeat seems clear from the  Vickers report, which proposes to protect the taxpayer by a „ring fence‟ separating  commercial and investment banking. 
Key Words:    Money and banking, Seigniorage, Risk-taking, Bailouts, Regulation 
JEL Classification: E41 E58 G21 G28 
                                                              
1 
We would like to acknowledge the benefit of discussions with Sayantan Ghosal, Peter Hammond, John Kay, Frederic Schlosser and Jonathan Thomas and comments from seminar participants at the Universities of Heriot- Watt, York and Warwick, the Royal Economic Society Conference and the Bank of England, especially  Henrique Basso, Michael McMahon, David Miles, Udara Peiris and Paul Youdell. For research support, we are  grateful to Antonia Maier funded by ESRC/CAGE. All errors are ours. 
Corresponding author: marcus.miller@warwick.ac.uk  
1 

========2========

‘Expansion in the variety of intermediaries and financial transactions has major  benefits…[But] it has potential downsides … to do with incentives’. Rajan (2005) 
Introduction 
With the adoption of Inflation Targeting, monetary policy in the UK came to consist  essentially in setting the discount rate, without any special attention to monetary aggregates.  The shift of focus from monitoring developments in money and banking to policy rules for  interest rates was reflected in the widespread adoption of DSGE models by Central Banks -- with Taylor rules used to determine interest rates and the assumption of efficient markets  used to justify „light touch‟ regulation. The granting of operational independence in setting  interest rates to the Bank of England in 1997 was, indeed, accompanied by a transfer of  responsibility for Financial Stability to the FSA – a newly created agency that ipso facto lacked practical experience .  
In fact, the combined forces of increased globalization and reduced regulation led to  extraordinary developments in UK banking-    an unprecedented increase in the size and  profitability of banking relative to GDP, (see charts in Appendix A, based on Haldane et al,  2010), with a pronounced degree of market concentration (see ICB, 2010, p.9). Although, at  the time, it seemed that this headlong expansion was achieved without any great increase in  risk, it ended in severe liquidity runs and solvency crises with two mortgage banks being  nationalised and major two universal banks rescued with substantial capital support from the  Treasury.  
Chastened by this episode, macroeconomists are busy adding financial frictions to their  models. For banking, too, there is surely a case for retooling. The account of banking to be  found in Allen and Gale‟s widely acclaimed monograph Understanding Financial Crisis published in 2007, for example, is of small, competitive, utility banks. In this paper,  therefore, starting with this traditional model of competitive banking as a baseline, we first  add the concentration of market power -- and draw out the consequence that banks will  collect the seigniorage attached to monopoly in money creation. Next we add the taking on of  
2 

========3========

risk associated with wholesale and investment banking2 and why this may not be apparent if  
it is „tail risk‟. Then we turn to an issue emphasized by Andy Haldane, Director of Financial  Stability at the Bank of England, namely the shift in strategic power that has taken place as  banks have grown so large in size and complexity that the state is forced to bail them out with  taxpayers money -- an issue tackled in the Final Report of the Independent Commission on  Banking (2011) in terms of „getting the taxpayer off the hook‟. 
Two informational paradigms 
Before embarking on detailed analysis, an important issue to be confronted is whether the  players in the industry were aware of the severe risk of insolvency to which the banks were  exposed, or not. Were they as unaware of the trouble in store as those outside the industry – the politicians, for example, happy to see such success for enterprise in Britain and the taxes  it was yielding; or the regulators, willing to let the industry run on a loose leash with „light  touch‟ regulation; or depositors, amazed at the salaries paid by the rapidly expanding  investment arms of previously staid commercial banks, but confident that their money  remained in safe hands? 
Two contrasting informational paradigms may be considered. The first, that of asymmetric  information3, where banks were aware of risk but outsiders were not, is the perspective taken  by Hellman et al. (2000) in analysing regulations to check excessive risk-taking („gambling‟)  by those managing bank portfolios; and by Rajan (2005), whose assessment of the powerful  incentives for taking on tail risk is widely regarded as a prescient early-warning of the crisis  to come4. It is also the view taken  subsequently by Paul Wooley in  The Future of Finance (2010, Chapter Three). 
The second paradigm, what de la Torre and Ize (2011) call one of collective cognition, is  where neither principal nor agent is aware of the downside risks associated with new  
                                                              
2 
Involving the provision of finance to other financial institutions and large corporations, assisting governments  and large corporations in raising equity and debt finance, advising on M&A, acting as counterparty to client  trades, etc see ICB (2010, p.45). 
3 
with the associated principal/agent problem  of h ow to design incentives to promote the objectives of the  
principal  even though the agent is better  informed. 
4 
It was the approach used, more broadly, to warn of the risks of corporate looting in an earlier paper by Akerlof  and Romer (1993). 
3 

========4========

investment strategies5. This is the p erspective  taken by  Gennaioli et al. (2011) , for examp in  their paper on “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and financial fragility”. 
le,  
Though the policy implications may differ, the two approaches are close to being  observationally equivalent: risks are taken which lead to insolvency -- and possibly to  emergency rescue packages for failing financial firms. Nor does asking the players help: even  if there is asymmetric access to information, the agent may choose to neglect some factors ex  ante and and/or to feign ignorance ex post. 
Recognising that the distribution of information is endogenous might help to discriminate  between these two approaches, however, as in the discussion of distorted incentives by Rajan (2005). One of these distortions is: 
„the incentive to take risk that is concealed from investors – since risk and return  are related, the manager then looks as if he outperforms peers given the risk he  takes. Typically, the kinds of risks that can be concealed most easily, given the  requirement of periodic reporting, are risks that generate severe adverse  consequences with small probability but, in return, offer generous compensation  the rest of the time. These risks are known as tail risks.‟ Rajan (2005, p. 316)  
A simple example, from Rajan (2010, pp. 138-9), is of a financial manager, with a safe  security on the balance sheet, who posts returns that include the premiums on an out-of-the- money put – conveniently left off balance sheet. The overall return on such a portfolio will be  elevated because of the risk involved – but this will not be apparent for some time (because it  is „in the tail‟) and, as a contingent liability, can be left off balance sheet. So the investor can collect what is effectively the risk premium as a bonus, leaving the firm badly exposed as and  when the downside appears6. T he names of the trading strategies  that were being  used  also  suggest an  ex ante awareness of risk: they include, apparently: 
IBG (I‟ll Be Gone if it doesn‟t work), and in Chicago, the O‟Hare Option (buy a ticket  departing from O‟Hare International Airport: if the strategy fails, use it; if the strategy  succeeds, tear up the ticket and return to the office). That such strategies were common  enough in the industry as to have names suggests that not all traders were oblivious of  the risks they were taking. Rajan (2010, p.139). 
                                                              
5 
In the words of Charles Goodhart at the Herriot Watt Conference: „The depositors didn‟t know, the regulators  didn‟t know; the banks themselves did not know [of the risks inherent in expanding their portfolios]‟. 6 
Foster and Young (2011) demonstrate further that the use of financial derivatives to reshape portfolio returns  makes it almost impossible to discriminate the true alpha investor from a mimic on the basis of realised returns  for an extended period of time. 
4 

========5========

In these circumstances, we have opted for the principal/agent paradigm in the analysis of the  banking crisis that follows7, graft ing the  „gambling‟model of Hellman et al. (2000) onto the  base-line model of Allen and Gale (2007), modified to include seigniorage and risk as  discussed above. But it is important that proposed reform measures be robust to the choice of  paradigm. 
Strategic balance of banks and the state 
To the extent that seigniorage increases the „franchise‟ value of banking, so, it might be  reasoned, monopoly power will help to check excessive risk-taking, and complement  official regulation in the form of required capital and real time monitoring. But this ignores  the strategic threat that large banks can pose for society in terms of negative externalities  that will ensue if they are not rescued after risky gambles that fail -- as can be seen in terms  of a game where the banks have first-mover advantage.  In this setting, a universal bank  realises correctly that, given the threat of economic disruption that would follow from  liquidation, a bail out after a gamble that fails is a subgame perfect response for the  regulator. As the monopoly bank is insured against risk, it has the incentive to gamble. 
To promote prudent behaviour when banks possess significant strategic power, structural  reform to shift the balance between large banks and the regulatory authorities is surely  required. A key issue with regard to the recommendations of ICB in particular is whether  the proposal to ring-fence retail banking – with the associated ban on many risky strategies  – will shift strategic power back to the regulator so that bank resolution is a credible threat. 
The model used in this paper is admittedly stylised and compact; and there is, of course,  an extensive literature on the market structure of the financial sector from the  perspective of industrial organisation, succinctly summarised in Allen and Gale (2000)  and Freixas and Rochet (2008), for example. Recent research has used network theory  to analyse the structure of banking system, focusing on how inter-bank connectivity  affects the transmission of systemic risk. Gai and Kapadia (2010a) and May and  Arinaminpathy (2010), for example, study the stability of the banking system using  random graphs and find that it is typically “robust-yet-fragile” (robust to the failures of  periphery banks but fragile in respect of failure by central players). Our „moral hazard‟  
                                                              
7 
When we come to discuss regulatory responses, however, we will consider the extent to which the measures  proposed are robust – i.e. will work even if the problem is one of „collective cognition‟. 
5 

========6========

approach suggests that concentration may arise for strategic reasons; and we investigate how concentration may impact on banks‟ incentives to behave prudently, focusing for  convenience on the case of monopoly. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section 1 reviews the traditional model of  competitive banking and modifies it to allow for market concentration. In Section 2 we analyse the equilibrium when „tail risk‟ investment opportunities are available to a  monopoly bank with an information advantage; and investigate how far the franchise  value and/or loss-absorbing capital can ensure prudent behaviour. Section 3 extends the  analysis to look at the strategic factors that arise when banking is highly concentrated  and economic externalities come into play. Section 4 looks at implications for banking  reform -- the ICB proposals in particular. Section 5 concludes. 
1. Utility Banking: competition and concentration 
To  fix  ideas,  we  first  use  the  standard three-date  model  with  „early  and  late‟  consumers  (depositors) to  see  how  market  concentration  affects  bank  profitability.  This  is  done  by  comparing the optimal „take it or leave it‟ deposit contract offered by a monopoly bank with  the competitive equivalent. 
Following  Bryant  (1980),  Diamond  and  Dybvig  (1983),  and  Allen  and  Gale (2007),  each  round has three dates,  . There are two assets available to the bank, short and long,  
all  associated  with  constant  return  to  scale  technology.  The  short  asset  – representing  accessible storage – lasts only one period, and converts one unit of good today into one unit  tomorrow.  The  long  asset  – representing  illiquid  but  productive  investment  – takes  two  periods to mature, and converts one unit invested at t = 0 into  units at t = 2 later. There  
is a continuum of ex ante identical depositors with measure 1, each endowed with one unit of  good at  . At  , the types of depositors are known, a  fraction  of them  
being early consumers who derive utility from consumption only at  
; and  
fraction  
being late consumers who derive utility from consumption at 
. 
The ex ante utility of depositors is 
(1) 
6 

========7========

where  
and  
are consumptions for early and late consumers, while  
is strictly  
increasing and strictly concave. 
Assume that depositors have an outside option which gives a minimum utility of  
.8 
For depositors to participate in banking, the utility from the deposit contract offered should  be at least at the level of this outside option, 
. 
(3) 
The other incentive constraint is that the banking contract should be able to separate early and  late consumers (so late consumers have no incentive to withdraw earlier), so  
. 
(4) 
Returns from short and long assets are used to finance early and late consumptions as follows 
(5) 
and 
. 
(6) 
The sequence of events is such that at  
, a bank offers a contract  
in exchange for  
the depositor‟s endowment. At  
, the types of the depositors are realised: and, if they are  
the early consumers, they receive  . At  
, the late consumers receive consumption  . 
1.1 The competitive case 
The competitive banking solution is illustrated in Figure 1, where the horizontal axis  represents consumption in date 1 and the vertical the consumption at date 2, and the  indifference curves represent expected utility of the average depositor. The participation  constraint on banking outcomes is indicated by the downward sloping convex curve passing  through the point  labelled Market Equilibrium: so feasible deposit contracts are  
restricted to consumption points in the convex set defined by (3). The downward sloping  straight line  passing through the Market Equilibrium indicates the resource constraint  
                                                              
8 
Specifically potential depositors can, after the realisation of types, exchange their endowments with each other  for early and late consumption goods in capital markets to ensure that  See Allen and Gale  (2007, pp. 60-64) for discussion of such a market equilibrium. 
7 

========8========

applying to banking equilibria. Bank profitability is zero on  
(but positive on  , i.e. when  
the line is shifted to the left).  
The competitive contract is illustrated at point A in the figure, where the indifference curve  (iso-EU) is tangent to the zero profit line ( ). For risk aversion greater than 1, it can be seen  
that  
.  
Inter-temporal  efficiency  condition 
Market  equilibrium 
Competitive  banking 
S 
N 
A 
B 
Iso-EU 
Participation  constraint 
Monopoly  banking 
Figure 1. Competitive and monopoly banking  
In the standard model of competitive banking discussed above, the capital structure may be  varied without any implications for the asset side of the balance sheet: and Diamond and  Dybvig‟s (1983) model of debt-financed banking was promptly complemented by Jacklin‟s  (1987) version of pure equity banking. The Modigliani and Miller Theorem applies because  of the assumptions of perfect competition, full information and no risk.9 
                                                              
9 
Where the bank is fully equity financed, with the shareholders paid dividends in each period, the cost of capital  is  where  is the per share dividend paid to all shareholders in period i, i.e., the cost of capital is  the second period dividend per unit invested – corrected for the interim dividend paid out in period 1. With  perfect competition and no risk, this will match the return on capital, R. 
8 

========9========

1.2 Monopoly banking and the ‘seignorage’ on money creation 
„It is well known that financial intermediaries can extract rents by exploiting monopoly  power through some combination of market share, collusion and barrier to entry‟ (Woolley,  2010, p.124). This can be accommodated in the traditional banking model without much  difficulty by allowing for positive profits, as in Chang and Velasco (2001). Here we  explicitly consider the case of monopoly: in addition to being analytically tractable, this has  the implication that any failure will be „systemic‟.  
A risk-neutral monopoly bank is assumed to maximise its undiscounted, one round, profits  by choosing a suitable deposit contract  and investment in short asset,  , i.e 
, 
(7) 
The first two terms from the profit function are returns from the short and long assets  respectively, and the last two terms represent early and late consumption. The optimal deposit  contract is determined when the monopoly bank maximises its profits in (7) subject to  constraints (3)-(6).  
Since the short asset earns lower returns, the bank will have incentive to minimise its holding  of x. This implies that (5) must always be binding, i.e. 
(5‟) 
Replacing x using (5‟), the above problem can be rewritten as 
(7‟) 
subject to  
(6‟) 
plus (3) and (4). 
The outcome with monopoly can be characterised as follows: 
9 

========10========

Proposition 1:  
The optimal monopoly banking contract  
temporal efficiency,   
,  and the participation constraint,   
. This contract exists if and only if 
. 
and it must satisfy  
. 
satisfies the first order condition for inter- 
(8) 
Proof: The existence condition is trivial because otherwise the feasible set is empty. When  (8) is given by a strict inequality, constraint (6‟) is not binding while (3) binds. In this case,  
the first order condition is given by  
utility function is strictly concave.  
, which implies  
since  
and the  
QED 
Thus the monopoly bank uses its market power to deny depositors any of the welfare gains  available to risk pooling. This monopoly solution is shown at point B in Figure 1. Profit  maximisation subject to the participation constraint is achieved when the profit function  
is  
tangent to the indifference curve of the depositor‟s ex ante utility function,  
. 
As regards the distribution of monopoly profits, we assume that these accrue to a limited  number of shareholders. Thus, while all members of the population have the same unit  endowment of goods, a small fraction of the population,  
the profits of the monopoly bank. 
, are also entitled to share in  
The final outcome, as shown in the figure, is one of inter-temporal efficiency but income  inequality. The majority of the population will expect to achieve the utility associated with no  banking, being constrained to consume at point B on the participation constraint.  
Shareholders, however, will expect to consume an additional amount which takes them to  point S, which is the sum of the contract offered by the monopoly bank and their entitlement  as shareholders. See Appendix B for brief discussion of how this may affect the Gini  
coefficient. 
10 

========11========

2. Banking with ‘tail risk’ 
In discussing its extraordinary expansion of the US banks just before the financial crisis,  Reinhart and Rogoff (2009, p.210) comment: 
The size of the US financial sector more than doubled, from an average of 4% of GDP  in the mid-1970s to almost 8% of GDP by 2007… Leaders in the financial sector  argued that in fact their high returns were the result of innovation and genuine value- added products, and they tended to grossly understate the latent risks their firms were  undertaking10. 
For  analytical convenience,  by the financial sector incentives to shift risks into the  
in what follows  we leave  to one side , and focus on the  
tail . 
the real productivity gains  profit to be made due to distorted  
generated  
As in Hellman  et al. (2000), we assume that the bank exploits the asymmetry of information  to invest in a risky asset with mean return  , whose true prospects for high and low returns  
are private information to the bank. These prospects – to be realised in  
– are denoted  
and  
respectively, with probabilities  and  
and we only consider  
the case where  is a mean-preserving-spread11 of  
, i.e.,  
. Because of  
the information asymmetry, the downside possibility is not known to the depositors who treat  
the prospect of high returns as safe – the sweet fruits of innovative financial engineering. As  these high, and seemingly safe, returns are not available outside banks, there is no shift to the  outside option. 
2.1 ‘Tail risk’ in a Monopoly bank 
We assume there is concentration in banking and focus especially on a monopoly bank which  offers the non-risky contract  to consumers. Its expected profits are then 
(13) 
                                                              
10 
That the value added from the banking system may be overestimated in the absence of tail riskhas been  documented in Colangelo and Inklaar (2010). Wang et al. (2009) suggest a way to measure properly the  contribution of the banking sector in a general equilibrium setting. 
11Hellman et al. (2000) use the word gamble to describe the taking 
-on of the  tail risk with lower mean return.  Note that, we use the term gamble below even when there is no lowering of expected return. Our results would  remain the same even if the expected return for taking risky investment is lower than the safe return. 
11 

========12========

where the term  
represents the realised profits in the high state,  
and  
represents the realised profits in the low state. Note  
that if  
, the bank will not be able to fulfil its contract to late  
consumers, and will be insolvent. What happens in this case is not apparent to the depositors  ex ante, however: the low-probability financial crisis will be unanticipated. 
To find the optimal deposit contract, one maximises (13) subject to (4) and (5‟). Note that  here we cannot impose constraint (7‟), even in expected terms, because it is possible that the  bank is protected by limited liability – and might even be bailed out by the government in the  low state, as discussed further below. 
The optimal deposit contract is summarised in the following proposition, which covers two  cases, only the first being relevant here: 
Proposition 2:  
(1) If the bank uses the risky technology, and if  
, then the  
optimal contract is a solution to  
and  
.  
(2) If  
Proposition 1. 
, the optimal deposit contract is the same as that in  
Proof: See Appendix C. 
It is worth noting that the gambling bank will offer a deposit contract with dated  
consumptions further apart than for a bank that does not gamble. The optimal deposit contract  with a gambling monopoly is shown in Figure 2, using the same axes as in Figure 1. As long  as the gamble succeeds, the effective returns for the long asset will apparently have increased  to  , so the iso-profit functions show a clockwise rotation (see  and  ) and the efficiency  
locus also shifts as if there has been a positive productivity shock. But as discussed above  there is no change in the outside option, so the deposit contract shifts along the original  participation constraint. Consequently, the optimal deposit contract offered by the gambling  bank is at B‟‟ where the iso-profit function  is tangent to the binding participation constraint  
(2). Compared with the contract without gambling, date 1 consumption falls and date 2  consumption increases. As long as the gamble succeeds, so bank profits, ( ), will rise  
12 

========13========

sharply, as is suggested by the point S representing consumption of owner-managers of the  monopoly bank. 
2.2 Franchise values and capital buffers as checks on gambling 
Hellmann, Murdock and Stiglitz (2000) consider two regulatory restraints on gambling  behaviour: either to impose minimum capital requirements and/or to limit deposit rates so as  to allow banks to make excess profits (as with Regulation Q in the U.S.) – subject to the loss  of the bank licence if the bank fails in either case. 
As Bhattacharya (1982) points out, however, the threat of losing its franchise could alone inhibit gambling by a financial institution; and Allen and Gale (2000, p. 269) note that „the  incentive for banks to take risks in their investments … is reduced the greater the degree of  concentration and the higher the level of profits‟.12 Before lookingat regulatory intervention,  consider the possibility of self-regulationvia franchise values. 
Self-regulation: franchise value without capital requirements 
Will monopoly profits suffice to check gambling without regulation? To compute the  franchise value of the monopoly, we consider a repeated game with infinite number of  possible rounds. Each round has three dates, and the bank exchanges its deposit contractwith  consumers at the beginning of each round. There is no discounting within the round but the  discount factor between two consecutive rounds is  . If the bank does not gamble,  
its capitalised profits are given by the following value function: 
(14) 
In the context of the model we are using, this quantity  is the “seigniorage” accruing to the  
monopoly bank by virtue of its right to create money. Is this seigniorage large enough such  that its loss will prevent gambling?  
If the bank gambles, the value function is: 
(15) 
                                                              
12 
Boyd and De Nicolo (2005) have, however, argued that monopoly behavior which generates franchise values  may also have adverse selection effect as loan rates increase and loan quality deteriorates. 
13 

========14========

This means that the gambling bank can capture current-round profits and future discounted  profits if the gamble succeeds. But if the gamble fails, losses are taken over by the  government and shareholders lose the franchise. 
Simplifying (15) yields, 
. 
(16) 
To remove the incentive for the bank to gamble, we have to ensure that 
. 
(17) 
Using (14) and (16), one can rewrite (17) as 
(18) 
where the left hand side indicates the one round gain from gambling, and the right hand side  represents the ex ante cost of gambling: the probability of failed gamble,  , times the  
franchise value,  
. This „no-gambling-condition‟ is similar to that in Hellmann, Murdock  
and Stiglitz (2000).We may characterise the boundary of the no-gambling-constraint, NGC,  (where (18) holds as an equality, the specific form is given in Appendix C) in terms of  ,  
and  . 
Proposition 3:  
(1) Given  , the boundary of the no-gambling-constraint,  
in  . 
(2) An increase in  will result in a upward shift of the boundary  
, is downward sloping  
. 
Proof: See Appendix C. 
The boundary of the no-gambling-condition is shown labelled NGC in Figure 2, where the  horizontal axis indicates the higher returns for the gambling asset in good state and the  vertical the probability of gambling success. For the distribution of returns on risky  investment lying below the NGC boundary, the bank will invest prudently; while for the area  above the NGC boundary, the bank will take on excessive risks. 
14 

========15========

Taking on ‘tail risk’ 
Gambling 
Figure 2. No-gambling-condition (NGC) and the mimicking constraint 
The dotted curve, FYM, in Figure 2 indicates the mimicking strategy of Foster and Young  (2011), which replicates the safe pay-off with mean-preserving risky investments such that  
is set to zero and 
, where  
is chosen to reflect the targeted alpha  
investor. For the parameters used in Table 1 below, FYM lies above the NGC, so the bank  will gamble, as shown at point A for example, where the alpha target 
taking on tail risk13(see the entry for 
imposing capital requirement, k, as discussed  
The  essential  features of the boundary of n illustrated by the numerical example in Table 1, where  
o-gambling constraint given in P 
is achieved by  
and  
). This may be countered by  
in the next Section 
. 
roposition 3 . For these  
are  
consumption. (Given  
parameter values, the monopoly bank makes a seignoirage profit of 0.057, measured in date 2  
, this implies that almost 3 percent of the endowment  
will be  
transferred from the depositors to the shareholders even without taking on tail risk.) Entries in  
the table indicate how profits may be boosted by risk 
                                                              
-taking for various values of  
and  
.  
in our binominal model with  
13 
Using standard definition for tail risk, the lower threshold for tail risk is  mean preserving spread, as shown by the dashed horizontal line in the figure. 
15 

========16========

2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
π=0.95  
π=0.9  
π=0.7  
π=0.5  
Table 1: Expected flow of profit for monopoly bank that gambles ( 
) 
Clearly, the opportunity for a monopoly bank to take on tail risk can substantially undermine  its incentive to behave prudently. But the higher the discount factor, the less the incentive for  the bank to gamble, as the franchise is valued higher. For a discount factor of  , entries  
in bold14 (in blue) towards the lower left of the table satisfy the no 
others fail; however, for a more long -sighted bank with a discount factor of  
-gambling condition, while  
, the  
underlined entries (in red) also satisfy  
no -gambling condition. 
15 
Capital requirements as a check in gambling 
It is clear from the numerical examplesabove that when  is small, the franchise value itself  
may not be sufficient to deter gambling. In this case, extra measures are needed to ensure  correct incentives. So, in what follows, we consider imposing regulatory capital  requirements. 
With the imposition of a positive capital requirement,  , a gambling bank‟s expected profit  
becomes: 
where  is measured against total deposits. In the good state, capital will not bring additional  
cost; but in the bad state, the bank will have more to lose. 
The imposition of the capital requirement modifies the no-gambling condition 
. 
                                                              
14 
Note that equation (18) is used to check whether each entry satisfies the no-gambling-condition. 15 
Raising δ to 0.95 would be sufficient to ensure that point A satisfies the NGC. 
16 

========17========

Note that  has no effect on the optimal deposit contract offered by the gambling bank, and 
has no effect on  
and  
, so the no-gambling-condition above can be rewritten as 
. 
(18‟) 
It is clear that in checking gambling 
is a perfect substitute for the franchise value  
.  
Since  
is increasing in  and  
, the imposition of the capital requirement shifts the no- 
gambling boundary, NGC, in Figure 2, upward, reducing the incentive to gamble for any  given  and  . 
It is worth bearing in mind, however, that the efficacy of regulatory capital will also be  limited by outside options. Securitisation may be one of these: if regulatory burden on banks  becomes excessive, securitisation may be a form of „regulatory arbitrage‟, helping to move  the business of banking off-balance sheet. In Appendix D we look ex-ante monitoring – the  loss of franchise value in particular – an important complement to the ex-post measures  considered above. 
3. Concentration, strategic behaviour and the U-shaped No- Gambling Boundary 
A further key element not yet considered is the role of negative externalities, what de la Torre  and Ize (2011) refer to as collective action problem. If the banking sector is highly  concentrated, the failure of one bank is likely to spread to the whole sector, generating  systemic risk; so, to prevent a wholesale banking collapse – with all the externalities that will  involve -- the government may see no alternative but to bailout the failing bank.16 Seeing  itself as “too big to fail” can greatly undermine a bank‟s incentive to invest prudently , as  Haldane and Alessandri (2009) point out in a paper with the suggestive title “Banking on the  State”. 
Here too there is a choice of informational paradigms – the view that these are issues of  which agents are unaware (preciselybecause they are externalities) and the view that they  
                                                              
16 
As the then Chancellor reports: “The risk of one bank collapsing and taking all the others with it was acute. I  suppose it could have been tried, but I would not have wanted to be responsible forthe economic and social  catastrophe that might follow.” (Darling, 2011, p142) 
17 

========18========

simply chose to keep quiet. Again one might want to look at the incentives to find things out.  An interesting case in point arose when the FSA sought to establish why big financial firms  operating in the City of London only looked at minor shocks when conducting stress tests. 
The public officials asked the bankers why their firms had failed to explore the  possibility of a real blow-up. Was it a result of disaster myopia, or a failure to  appreciate the dangers of contagion? No, one of the attendees replied. It was nothing  like that. The problem was that risk departments didn‟t have any incentive to simulate  genuine disasters. If such an awful eventuality materialized, the simulators would likely  lose their bonuses and possibly their jobs. And, in any case, the authorities would step  in and rescue the bank. Cassidy (2009, p.317) 
As Rajan (2010, p. 151) notes, the same logic may apply even for small firms if traders  believe that the risky strategies are being so widely used that there will be official  intervention when collectively they fail:  
But as enough banks imitated the innovators and took on similar risks, and as it  became common wisdom among market participants that the market would be  supported in the event of a crisis, there would have been strong incentives to  load up on tail risks, even if such activity became visible. Rajan (2010, p.151). 
3.1 Bailout as the sub-game perfect equilibrium 
Before discussing in detail how the no-gambling-condition might be modified in the presence  of “too big to fail” policy, consider the strategic elements involved with the aid of a simple  two-player game between the banking industry – represented by a monopoly bank -- and the  state – represented by the taxpayer.17 
In the  extensive game shown in Figure 3 we focus on a big bank with substantial franchise  
va lue. 
18 
T he players are a Bank and the Taxpayer – assumed also to be a Depositor. It is the  Bank that moves first, choosing either to pursue traditional Prudent banking or to experiment  with Innovative behaviour, where for simplicity weignore capital requirements. The figures  in parentheses indicate the notional payoffs to the Bank and Taxpayer-cum-Depositor. Note  that, in order to see whether the Bank is able to profit from risk per se (as argued by Sinn for  example), Innovative behaviour is taken to involve a mean preserving widening of the spread of returns on the portfolio of the Bank. We also assume that there is asymmetric information 
                                                              
17 
This is a heroic simplification, of course, as in practice protecting the interests of the taxpayeris delegated to  a troika of agencies, the Bank of England, Treasury and theFSA. 
18 
Prior to this game being played, banks as a group will have chosen whether or not to concentrate as is  
discussed further below.  
18 

========19========

about probabilities of Success or Failure, with the Bank knowing the probabilities (π and 1-π,  respectively) but not the Taxpayer. (Appendix E is a more realistic case with payoffs  calculated for a dynamic game using parameter values based on Sinn (2010).) 
If the Bank chooses to act Prudent, the safe return of 2 is split equally between Bank and the  Taxpayer. But if it chooses to innovate the payoffs depend on Nature and the response to  failure. Nature moves next, awarding Success or Failure to the innovation with equal  probability, the former generating attractive returns of 4 (with the depositor getting 1 and the  rest going to the bank) the latter yielding nothing. It is now the Taxpayers turn; action is only  called for if the Bank fails, however, and there is a choice of closure (Liquidation) or granting  a Bailout. In the latter case, with payoffs shown as (0,0), the depositor is bailed out by the Taxpayer, at zero net gain; and the Bank gets nothing either. If the Bank goes into  Liquidation, however, (as for Lehman Brothers) it also loses its franchise, f; and, in addition, there is a large negative externality for the Taxpayer in the form of economic disruption, x. 
Bank 1 
Prudent 
Innovative 
Nature 
(1,1) 
Success 
Failure 
,,0 
(3,1) 
Bailout  
Taxpayer 
Nature Liquidation 
(0,1-b=0) 
(-f,- x)  
Figure 3. Moral hazard as the Taxpayer underwrites risky behaviour 
19 

========20========

Proceeding by backward induction, we note that the Taxpayer will opt for a Bailout as the  preferred action at the last stage. Given the expectation of a Bailout, and equal probabilities  for success and failure, the expected payoffs for the Bank and Taxpayer are (1.5, 0.5)  Compared to the payoffs from prudent banking (1,1). Innovative behaviour will induce a net  transfer of 0.5 from the Taxpayer to the Bank. So the Bank can expect to get more from taking risks than sticking to prudent banking. 
It is clear from the payoffs that the Taxpayer would prefer the Bank to act prudently and  avoid risky innovation, but this is not the outcome of the game. Using backward induction,  the Bank will choose to take risks knowing that the Taxpayer will bail it out as the sub-game  perfect equilibrium. Since the Taxpayer (who takes the down-side of risky bets) is effectively  providing insurance for the Bank, this is a classic case of moral hazard. Note that the  Taxpayer could choose Liquidation were it not for the high social cost of bank failure19, the  externality labelled  x, which appears to act as a credible threat: „Liquidate if you dare!‟. If  this is so, a key element of banking reform will be how to limit this threat. 
The fact that the negative externality acts as a credible threat will surely be relevant to prior bank decisions on choosing the level of concentration. If high concentration were chosen,  bank failures are likely to be systemic, i.e. impose significant negative externality: so failed  banks will be bailed out. Anticipating this, the dominant strategy for banks is to proceed with  Mergers & Acquisitions so as to put the Taxpayer on the hook in the event of failure.  
As to the puzzle of why the Taxpayer-cum-Regulator would allow the Bank to innovate if the  outcome is a net transfer, one must bear in mind that the Taxpayer is assumed to be unaware  of the probabilities; and may for example believe that the Bank will attract true alpha  investors who will deliver a high payoff („success‟) for sure -- in which case, innovation  would lead to better returns to the bank without any transfers (– and the Taxpayer may hope  to share in some of these benefits by a tax on extra profits). 
                                                              
19 
Assuming that Liquidation is chosen as a tie breaker. 
20 

========21========

3.2 Concentration and U-shaped No Gambling Boundary 
Can these strategic features be incorporated within the framework developed in Section 2? In  what follows, we analyse how given concentration can affect bank‟s incentives; then we  discuss the strategic incentives for choosing high concentration. 
For analytical simplicity, let the degree of concentration,  ( 
fraction of the monopoly franchise value ,  
) be defined by the  
, that is obtained if a bank plays safe or is bailed  
out after a failed gamble. To model “too big to fail” policy, TBTF, let the probability the  
government will come to the bank‟s rescue,  
, increase with , with  
and  
. The rationale for specifying the bailout policy in this way is as follows: when  
the degree of concentration is low, no bank is “too big to fail”, so the failure of a bank is less  likely to have systemic effect; when the degree of concentration increases, any bank failure is  more likely to be systemic, so the probability of attracting bailout increases. The TBTF policy  used here specifies that if the bank gambles and fails, it may be bailed out by the government  which will honour all deposit contracts. In this case, the bank loses its equity buffer but its  
franchise is not revoked. 
With a given degree of concentration, the bank‟s profit if it plays safe is a fraction of that  under monopoly, so the deposit contract offered by these safe banks will be a scaled-up  version of that offered by the non-gambling monopoly (though each bank makes less profits  
per unit of deposit). 
For the gambling bank under market concentration,  , its expected profit, assuming  
, is given by 
                                                 (19) 
where the probability of losing capital for the gambling banks is  
. Note that the  
optimal deposit contract with market concentration of  , if they exist, would be the same as  
that of a gambling monopoly. 
21 

========22========

Given the capital requirements and the TBTF policy specified above, the no-gambling  condition is then modified to 
, 
(20) 
where  
represents franchise value under full monopoly and  
the franchise value with  
market concentration of  
and the failed gambling bank will be bailed out with probability  . 
To summarise the results for the no-gambling boundary (above which banks will not gamble)  in  and  space for some given  and  : 
Proposition 4:  
(i) For  
, the no-gambling boundary is downward sloping in beta and k space.  
(ii) For  
, the no-gambling boundary is U-shaped in  and  space. 
(iii)Increasing  Proof: See Appendix C. 
shift the U-shaped no-gambling boundary upwards. 
The significance of Proposition 4 (iii) is that if the bailout is restricted to banks with less  attractive gambles (i.e., low  and/or low  ) the U-shaped no-gambling boundary will be  
much less pronounced, as we discuss further below. 
22 

========23========

Required  Capital  
R 
Prudent Banking  
Excess  Risk-taking 
L 
Excess  Risk-taking 
N 
UK 
TBTF 
Concentration  
Figure 4. How bailouts increase the risk of imprudent banking    
The above framework may be used in a heuristic discussion of options for the reform of the  UK banking system, distinguishing in particular between reforms related to structure of bank balance sheets (the degree of leverage, for example) and those related to markets (such as  the degree of concentration). For this purpose, we use Figure 4, with market concentration, , 
on the horizontal axis (acting as a proxy for franchise value, assuming that high concentration  implies high franchise value), and minimum capital requirement, k, on the vertical axis (to  represent variations in bank leverage).  
The no gambling boundary, defining the shaded area of Prudential Banking, is the U-shaped  schedule LNR in the figure. The downward slope LN reflects the trade-off between bank‟s  profitability (franchise value) and the official capital requirement in terms of prudential  behaviour: as banking becomes more competitive and franchise values fall, so the minimum  capital requirement will need to be raised to ensure prudence, for any given degree of tail  
23 

========24========

risk.20 So the point L in Figure  under perfect competition. 
4 will represent the minimum capital requirement needed  
A s Haldane (2010, p .7) points out  -- on the basis of commercial ratings  -- an increase in  concentration increases the likelihood of an official bailout, as banks become „Too Big To  Fail‟. The evidence confirms that risky M&A activity earns the perverse privilege of  increasedaccess to state bailouts21. Taking this factor into account will of cour se greatly  encourage  bank mergers that lead to high concentration . In circumstances like these, where  banks can, so to speak, have their cake and eat it, the likelihood of banks  behaving prudently  is sharp ly reduced, as shown in Figure 4 . Let  , represented by the dashed line,  indicate the  
point at which banks become Too Big To Fail. To the left of this point , between L and N risk of losing franchise value is sufficient  to c heck gambling: to the right, however, the  franchise value increases the  probability of bailout  which encourages gambling.  Consequently, the region for prudential banking becom es U -shaped, as indicated by the  shaded area bounded by LNR in the Figure . In the next Section we discuss structural reform  as a way to remove the strategic threat. 
, the  rise of  
4. Regulatory Reform: the Vickers report 
Various measures for prudential regulation are discussed in Haldane (2011), including equity  capital requirements (supplemented as appropriate by contingent convertible securities,  CoCos), strengthening bank governance by modifying control rights, and improving  performance criteria and remuneration schemes. Here we focus on the recommendations of  the ICB, chaired by Sir John Vickers, in its Final Report released in September 2011.  
4.1 Key features of the report 
Turning to the key recommendations of this Report, we note that they involve changes in  market structure as well as balance sheet restrictions.  
                                                              
20 
And, a shown in Proposition 4, heightened „tail risk‟ (i.e. increasing  ) shifts the no gambling  boundaryLN‟R upwards. 
21 
Compare the treatment of High Street banks which  were  bailed out  by official purchase of equity shares  
(Lloyds Banking Group and RBS)  as against  the mortgage banks (Northern Ro ck and Bradford & Bingley)  which were nationalised . 
24 

========25========

Structural separation is recommended in the form of a „retail ring-fence‟ designed to isolate  and contain banking activities where the continuous provision of service is vital to the  economy and a bank‟s customers so as to ensure that such provision is protected from  incidental activities and that it can be maintained in the event of bank failure without  government solvency support. „In essence, ring-fenced banks would take retail deposits,  provide payments services and supply credit to households and businesses.‟ ICB (2011, para.  3.1) These services are divided into those which are mandated (involving about 18% of assets  as of end 2010); are permitted (another 18%); and those which are prohibited (about 64%).   
Ring-fenced banks will thus be banned from a very considerable range of activities currently  conducted by universal banks. Depending on how much of the second category are taken  inside the fence, „the ring fence might include between a sixth and a third of the total assets  of the UK banking sector of over £6 trillion.‟‟ ICB (2011, para. 3.40). (As banks inside the  fence can stay linked with those outside, subject to arms length and other restrictions,  however, this is not the complete separation mandated by the Glass-Steagall Act in the USA.) 
In addition several steps are recommended in order to increase competition on the High Street  – increased transparency of costs and transferability of accounts, in particular. 
Balance sheet requirements involve substantial loss-absorbing capacity in the form of equity  and bonds so as to avoid claims on the taxpayer following bank insolvency. Specifically, the  Commission recommends that „large UK ring-fenced banks (and the biggest UK Globally  Significant Banks) be required to hold primary loss-absorbing capacity of at least 17% of  RWAs which can be increased to a further buffer of up to 3% of RWAs for a bank to the  extent that its supervisor has doubts about its resolvability‟, ICB (2010, para. 4.118).  
This loss absorbing capacity can be split between equity and bail-in bonds, where the equity- to-RWAs ratio is at least 10% for ring-fenced banks with 3% or more of UK GDP in RWAs  (falling to 7% for those with RWAs of 1% of UK GDP), ICB (2010, para. 4.132-134).  
As regards monitoring and transparency, issues discussed in Appendix C, the Commission  notes that: “[a] ring-fence of this kind would also have the benefit that ring-fence banks  would be more straightforward than some existing banking structures and thus easier to  manage, monitor and regulate.” (ICB, 2010, para 3.4) 
25 

========26========

4.2 Getting the taxpayer off the hook: bailout no longer guaranteed 
How can ring-fencing change the strategic relation between the state and banks? With  reference to the game tree in Figure 3, the fundamental requirement is that the severe  externalities triggered by unpremeditated bank closure be removed i.e. the payoff to the  Taxpayer in the case of liquidation be changed from -x to zero22. The means to this end  
include (a) improved  ex ante monitoring of risk-taking; (b) a great reduction of risks that may  be taken; (c) substantially increased loss-absorbing capacity on the part of the bank to cover  what risk remains, and (d) better resolution procedures should the retail bank need to be  reconstituted.  
Heuristically, this strategy can be illustratedwith reference to Figure 5,referring only to  banks within the ring-fence, where some of the measures should act to expand the region of  “Prudential Banking” (beyond that in the earlier Figure 4, indicated here by the dashed U- shape); others to shift the locus of a ring-fenced bank into this enlarged area.23 
                                                              
22 
Assuming that in the event of a tie the taxpayer will prefer liquidation to bail-out. 
23 
As access to more exotic gambles was found to shift the U -shaped frontier upwards according to Proposition  
5, so the  prohibition of many risky assets – two thirds of the current portfolio of UK banks, in fact   – should  have the reverse effect, as indicated by the shift from L to L‟ in the No Gambling frontier. Improved monitoring - backed by a threat of losing one‟s licence if caught – should further reduce the region of excess risk by making  the frontier slope down more steeply from L‟. Steps to move the locus  for ring-fenced banks towards Prudential  Banking  include both the decisive increase in the level of capital required for the operation of a ring-fenced  bank and steps to increase competition among High Street banks, see the arrow pointing NW in thefigure. 
26 

========27========

Required Capital  
Prudent Banking  
L 
L′ 
Risk Prohibition  & Monitoring 
Higher capital  requirements  
Excess  Risk-taking 
R 
Reduced  incentive  to Bailout  
Ring- fenced  Bank 
R′ 
and more  competition 
Excess  Risk-taking 
Concentration  
Figure 5. Checking risk-taking in ‘ring-fenced’ banks 
The various regulatory changes indicated  in the Figure– together with arrangements such as  „Living Wills‟ for prompt resolution – are, according to the ICB Final Report, designed to get  the taxpayer „off the hook‟ of bailing out universal banks in trouble. 
The stated purpose of retail „ring-fencing‟ is to get such banks back to the business of taking  retail deposits, and supplying credit and liquidity to households and businesses. Thus the  
proposed reforms would: 
put the UK banking system of 2019 on an altogether different basis from that of 2007.  In many respects, however, it would be restorative of what went before in the recent  past – better capitalised, less leveraged banking more focussed on the needs of savers  
and borrowers in the domestic economy.  
ICB (2011, p.18) 
We have analysed the Vickers Report from the perspective of asymmetric information. Are  the proposals still appropriate if there are problems of „collective cognition‟? Perhaps the  emphasis on ex ante monitoring -- and especially the outright banning of products that appear  risky -- could be seen as a step away from the Anglo-Saxon principle of common law (where  
27 

========28========

products are permitted unless found to be dangerous ) towards the Roman law principle (that  products are banned unless shown to be safe). In this case, as with new medicines, society  may be protected by shifting the burden of proof onto the innovator -- with some loss of  efficiency but gains in stability. 
5. Conclusion: back to banking basics 
There clearly is a dangerous propensity for banks to take on excessive risks in the current  regulatory environment: as Vickers (2011, p.2) remarks: “One of the roles of financial  institutions and markets is efficiently to manage risks. Their failure to do so – and indeed to  amplify rather than absorb shocks from the economy at large – has been spectacular.”  
Financial innovations, such as securitisation and Credit Default Swaps, have increased the  ease with which banks can take risky assets onto their balance sheets while satisfying the  regulatory norms set by Basel. There are clear private incentives for High Street banks to  expand into investment banking, raising their balance sheets well beyond the needs of  households and SME borrowers and shifting risk onto depositors and/or the taxpayer by  greatly increased leverage. But the social cost of interrupting the nationwide provision of  payments services and credit supply associated with bank failures means that banks that  combine retail and wholesale activities will be rescued by the government, a threat to the  economy that effectively puts tax-payers on the hook to underwrite the risks taken by large  universal banks. 
Nor has the incidence of crisis itself changed these incentives, apparently. As Diane Coyle  (2011), a former member of the UK Competition Commission, noted as bank profitability  recovered in 2010-11 despite a still-fragile economy: „The truth is that banks are again doing  well out of banking, but businesses and consumers are not... Bonuses are back... they are a  measure of monopoly rents in the business, it does not take great talent to make a profit by  taking excessive risk, safe from effective competition and sure of a bailout if needed.‟ 
As a contribution to the debate on problems besetting modern banking in Britain, we began with a simple model of retail banking and showed how, behind the veil of asymmetric  information, the incentive to take on risk can easily exceed the threat of losing the franchise – especially if the probability of losing the franchised is reduced by the prospect of an official  
28 

========29========

bailout. As the prudential benefits of increased concentration are progressively offset by the  prospect of rescue, the „prudential frontier‟ relating capital requirements to concentration  becomes U–shaped. 
This framework – of concentrated banking with asymmetric information – is used to discuss  the impact of regulatory reforms involving changes to market structure, balance sheet  restrictions and the efficacy of monitoring. Considering the reforms advocated by the ICB in  their Final Report in particular, we note that they are designed to offset excess risk-taking and  promote competition, i.e. to eliminate the very features that we have added to the basic  banking model to capture current distortions! But they go further. 
A key aim of Mrs Thatcher‟s industrial policy was to reduce the threat to the provision of  goods and services posed by strikes in the public sector – the confrontation with coal miners  being a decisive case in point. An important – perhaps the most important – aspect of the  „ring-fence‟ proposal viewed as industrial policy is how – by reducing the threat of abrupt  contagious closure on the part of retail banks – it aims to change the strategic balance  between banking and the state.  
29 

========30========

References: 
Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2000), Comparing Financial Systems, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Allen, F. and Gale, D. (2007), Understanding Financial Crises, New York: Oxford  
University Press. 
Akerlof, G. and Romer, P. (1993): Looting: The Economic Underworld of Bankruptcy for  
Profit. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 24(2), pages 1-74. 
Bhattacharya, S. (1982) "Aspects of Monetary and Banking Theory and Moral Hazard." 
Journal of Finance, May, 37(2), pp. 371-84. 
Boyd, J. and De Nicolo, G. (2005), „The theory of bank risk taking and competition  
revisited‟, The Journal of Finance, vol. LX No. 3. 
Bryant, J. (1980). “A Model of Reserves, Bank Runs, and Deposit Insurance,” Journal of Banking and Finance 4, 335-344. 
Cassidy, J. (2009),How Markets Fail: the Logic of Economic Calamities. London: Allen  
Lane. 
Chang, R. and Velasco, A. (2001) "A Model of Financial Crises In Emerging Markets," The  
Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 116(2), pages 489-517, May.  
Colangelo, A. and Inklaar, R. (2010). “Banking sector output measurement in the Euro area - 
a modified approach”. ECB working paper 1204. 
Coyle, D. (2011) „Merlin deal will not fix flawed banks‟, published in FT 8th Feb 2011. 
Darling, A. (2011), Back from the Brink, London: Atlantic Books. 
De la Torre, Augusto and Alain Ize, (2011), “Containing Systemic Risk: Paradigm-Based  
Perspectives on Regulatory Reform”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 5523. 
Diamond, D.W. and Dybvig, P.H. (1983), „Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity‟,  
Journal of Political Economy, 91 (June): 401–19. 
30 

========31========

Foster D. P. and Young, P., (2011) "Gaming Performance Fees by Portfolio Managers‟ The  
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming. 
Freixas, X. and Rochet J-C., (2008), Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press. 
Gai, P. and Kapadia, S., (2010), “Contagion in Financial Networks”, Bank of England  
Working Paper No. 383. 
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny, (2011), “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and  
financial fragility”, Journal of Financial Economics 125, forthcoming. 
Haldane, A. (2010), „The $100 billion question‟, Institute of Regulation & Risk, North Asia  
(IRRNA), Hong Kong, March 2010. 
Haldane, A. and Alessandri P. (2009), „Banking on the state‟, Available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf 
Haldane, A., Brennan, S. and Madouros, V., (2010), „What is the Contribution of the  
Financial Sector: Miracle or Mirage?‟ The Future of Finance: the LSE report, Chapter 2.  
London: LSE. 
Haldane, A. G. and May, R. M, (2011), “Systemic risk in banking ecosystems”, Nature 469,  
351–355. 
Hellmann, T. F., Murdock K. C. and Stiglitz J. E., (2000). "Liberalization, Moral Hazard in  
Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?" American  
Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol. 90(1), pages 147-165, March. 
Independent Commission on Banking (2010), „Issues Paper, Call for Evidence,‟ London:  
ICB. 
Independent Commission on Banking (2011), Final Report:Recommendations, London: ICB. 
Jacklin, C.J. (1987) „Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions and Risk Sharing.‟ In E.C  
Prescott and N. Wallace (eds), Contractual Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade, 26-47,  
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
Kuvshinov, D. (2011), “The optimal capital requirement for UK banks: a moral hazard  
perspective”, MSc Dissertation, Department of Economics, University of Warwick. 
31 

========32========

May, R. M. and Arinaminpathy, N. (2010), “Systemic risk: the dynamics of model banking  
systems”. J. R. Soc. Interface 7, 823–838. 
Rajan, R. G., (2005), „Has Financial Development Made the World Riskier?‟ Proceedings of  
the Jackson Hole Conference organised by Kanas City Fed. 
Rajan, R. G., (2010), Fault Lines, Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff, (2009), This Time It’s Different: Eight Centuries of Financial  
Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009 
Wang, J.C, S. Basu, and J.G. Fernald (2009). “A General Equilibrium Asset-Pricing  
Approach to the Measurement of Nominal and Real Bank Output”. In W.E. Diewert, J.S.  
Greenlees, and C.R. Hulten (Eds.) Price Index Concepts and Measurement. NBER Studies  
in Income and Wealth, Volume 70. 
Woolley, P., (2010), „Why are financial markets so inefficient and exploitative – and a  
suggested remedy‟, Future of finance: The LSE Report. London: LSE. 
32 

========33========

Appendices 
Appendix A Salient features of banking in Britain  
Two salient characteristics of UK banking are that the key players are universal banks24 and  that the industry is concentrated, „especially in the retail and commercial sector, where the  top six banks account for 88%of retail deposits‟ ICB (2010, p.9). Two other striking features  are the rapid expansion of balance sheets prior to the crisis; and the increase in measured  value added, especially in profits. As can be seen from Chart A1, banking assets doubled  relative to GDP since 1990, rising to more than five times annual GDP – which represents a  10-fold increase above the long run historical average of around 50%. 
Chart A1: UK banking sector as % of GDP. 
Note: The definition of UK banking sector assets used in theseries is broader after 1966,  but using a narrower definition throughout gives the same profile. 
Source: Haldane et al (2010, p.84) 
                                                              
24 
i.e., they combine both categories of banking - retail & commercial and wholesale & investment. 
33 

========34========

Evidence of the sharp rise in the measured contribution of banking to national income in the run-up to the financial crisis is provided by Haldane et al. (2010), where it is reported that,  using conventional measures of value added: 
In 2007, financial intermediation accounted for more than 8% of total GVA, compared  with 5% in 1970. The gross operating surpluses of financial intermediaries show an  even more dramatic trend. Between 1948 and 1978, intermediation accounted on  average for around 1.5% of whole economy profits. By 2008, that ratio had risen  tenfold to about 15% (See Chart A2).  
Chart A2: Gross operating surplus of UK private financial corporations (% of  total)  
Source: Haldane et al (2010, p.68) 
Perhaps the most extraordinary feature, however, is that the recent rapid expansion of balance  sheets and profitability was accompanied by an apparent reduction in the riskiness of bank  portfolios. As shown in Chart A3, the doubling of leverage from the late 1990s until just  before the crisis was accompanied by a halving of the fraction of risk-weighted assets. Thus – despite the efforts of the Basel Committee to ensure banks were adequately capitalised -- for  the period 2005-2008, leverage was around 40 for UK banks on average, and considerably  higher for some.  
34 

========35========

Chart A3: Leverage and risk-taking in UK banks. Source: Haldane et al (2010, p.89) 
Ex-post, the sliver of equity turned out to be far too slender to absorb the risks actually being  taken. In the event, official support for the financial sector running to 74 % of GDP  (including capital injections of more than 5% of GDP) had to be supplied to prevent banking  collapse25. 
                                                              
25 
See Haldane and Alessandri (2009, Annex, Table 1) who also describe various profit -making strategies  -    including taking on tail risk - that contributed to these losses and may have been induced by expectations of  state support. 
35 

========36========

Appendix B. Gambling and Gini Coefficient: Miracle and Mirage? 
It is evident that in this simplified model, bank concentration will lead to an increase in the  Gini coefficient compared with competitive banking: and this effect will become much more  pronounced with gambling. This is illustrated by the stylised Lorenz curves in Figure A1,  where σ represents the fraction of the population owning shares in the all-deposit bank. If ω  represents the consumption bundle available to depositors under monopoly banking, and  ω(1+μ) is the consumption available to the depositors who are also shareholders enjoying the  monopoly premium, μ, then  and the Gini coefficient26 turns out to be  
. When the bank gambles, the premium paid to owner 
-managers will of  
course rise, say to  
, shifting the Lorenz curve to  
in the figure.  
In discussing whether the contribution of financial sector is „Miracle or Mirage‟, Haldane et  al. (2010, pp. 79-80) report that the share of financial intermediation in employment in UK is  around 4%, and that: 
the measured „productivity miracle‟ in finance …has been reflected in the returns to  both labour and capital, if not in the quantity of these factors employed.For labour,  financial intermediation is at the top of the table, with the weekly earnings roughly  double the whole economy median. This differential widened during this century,  roughly mirroring the accumulation of leverage within the financial sector. 
Using the above formula, a doubling of consumption opportunities for those in finance would  add about 4% to the Gini coefficient, i.e. about half the rise in Gini coefficient for the UK  from 1986 when the Big Bang took place, to just before the crisis in 2007. (Focusing more  narrowly on Investment Banking, however, the Financial Times reports compensation  running at 6 times the median income in both US and UK.27 
                                                              
26 
i.e. the area OLP divided by O1P in the diagram. 27 
FT , Feb 17 
th, 2011, „Banker‟s pay: time for deep cuts.‟ 
36 

========37========

1 
P 
Cumulative  fraction of  income 
O 
Cumulative fraction of population from lowest to highest incomes 
Figure A1: Raising incomes in financial services and inequality 
1-σ 
1 
37 

========38========

Appendix C. Proof of Propositions 
Proof of Proposition 3 
If  
is low enough, the bank cannot honour the contract to the late consumers in the low  
state (the late consumption in this case is honoured by the insuring agency). So the bank‟s  profits are given by  . This changes the first order condition to  
. Together with the binding participation constraint, one can then determine the  
optimal contract as in the second part of Proposition 4. (Since case (2) has the same deposit  contract as that under certainty and no default from the bank, we use case (1) to represent  gambling.) 
If  
is large, the bank can honour the contract to the late consumers in either state. So the  
optimal contract satisfies the first order condition  
. With the  
binding participation constraint the same as in Proposition 1, the optimal contract must be the  same. 
Proof of Proposition 4 
Given the monopoly bank will gamble, it is best for it to choose the deposit contract  
specified in Proposition (4). In this case, to ensure that the bank will gamble, condition (18)  becomes 
. 
(B1) 
Similarly, given the monopoly bank will not gamble, it is best for it to choose the deposit  contract  specified in Proposition (3.1). To ensure that the bank will not gamble,  
condition (18) becomes 
. 
(B2) 
For some given parameters of  ,  
and  , it is always possible to have 
38 

========39========

. 
(B3) 
If (B3) is satisfied, then both (B1) and (B2) are true as  
and  
. So for the set of parameter values  
such that (B3) holds, the monopoly bank may choose either to gamble or to play safe. 
Now we show that in  
and  space, for a given delta, the boundary specified in (B3) lies  
below the boundary where (B2) holds as an equality and above the boundary where (B1)  holds as an equality. To simplify comparison, we fix the value for  . Then, we can select the  
appropriate value for  
such that (B3) holds. In this case, (B2) is satisfied. To ensure (B2)  
holds as an equality, we have to increase the value of  
. Since  
, the  
which ensures that (B2) is an equality must be greater than or equal to the  
for which (B3)  
holds. So the boundary of (B3) lies below the boundary where (B2) is an equality. Similarly,  one can show that (B3) also lies above the boundary where (B1) is an equality. 
In  
and  space, multiplicity of equilibria occurs in the area bounded by the boundaries of  
(B1) and (B2). So the sufficient condition to ensure no gambling is to choose the parameters  
and  such that they lie below the boundary of (B1). In what follows, we characterise  
of  
the general properties of this boundary. 
(1) Rewrite the no-gambling condition as 
. 
(B4) 
Note that the contract offered by the gambling bank,  
condition 
, 
and the binding participation constraint 
. 
So, it is clear that  
,  
and  
Using (B5) and (B6), one can show that 
, must satisfy the first order  
(B5) 
(B6) 
. This implies  
. 
39 

========40========

(B7) 
Applying the envelope theorem, one obtains,  
, 
(B8) 
and  
. 
(B9) 
Differentiating the no-gambling condition (B4) with respect to  and  
yields 
(B10) 
Since both terms before  
and  
are positive, the no-gambling condition must slope  
downward in  
and  space. 
Finally, note that if  
and  
, then (B4) holds. So the no-gambling boundary starts  
from  
in the  
and  space and goes asymptotically towards the  
axis. 
(2) An increase in  increases the coefficient of the second term in (B4),  
. To  
maintain equality,  
has to increase for a fixed  . Note that all no-gambling boundaries start  
from  
, so an increase in  swivels the no-gambling boundary upwards in the  
and 
space. 
Proof of Proposition 5 
As is shown in the proof of Proposition 5 above, it is sufficient to specify the no-gambling  condition (20) as 
, 
(B10) 
where  
is the optimal deposit contract offered by the gambling bank. 
40 

========41========

For  
,  
, so (B10) can be rewritten as 
(B11) 
Note that the deposit contract  is unaffected by either  or  , so to keep (B11) as an  equality, a reduction in  must be compensated by an appropriate increase in  . This  generates the downward sloping section of the no-gambling condition in  and  space. 
For  
, we rewrite (B10) as 
. 
(B12) 
Since the left hand side is independent of  and  , maintaining (B12) as an equality requires  the right hand side to be a constant. Differentiating the right hand side with respect to  or  ,  one can obtain the slope of the no-gambling condition as 
. 
(B13) 
It is clear from (B13) that the numerator is negative if  
and positive if  
. So the  
no-gambling condition is U-shaped. 
41 

========42========

Appendix D. Real-Time Monitoring 
For the case discussed above, the regulatory capital required to deter gambling can be  substantial, even for moderate gambles (see rows 1 and 3 in Table 2 below). One way to  reduce the capital charge is to introduce real-time monitoring. Real-time monitoring will be  characterised by a given probability of detecting gambling before it fails; and an associated  punishment. For simplicity, we assume that the probability of detection is q and the  punishment is the loss of franchise. (Later, we discuss the effect of other punishments.) In  this case, the value function of the gambling bank becomes 
or  
Note that introducing real-time monitoring simply scales down the profits of a gambling  bank, so the functional form of deposit contracts offered by the gambling bank are  unchanged. 
Applying the no-gambling-condition  
and re-arranging yields 
(18‟‟) 
Given capital requirements, imposing real-time monitoring reduces gambling profits and so  decreases  the  incentive  to  gamble.  By  comparing  (18‟‟)  with  (18‟),  it  is  clear  that the net  effect is “as if” there is an increase in franchise value. So, in terms of Figure 2, introducing  real-time monitoring further shifts the no-gambling-condition upwards in  and  space. 
Using the no-gambling-condition (18‟‟), one can obtain the minimum capital requirements as: 
42 

========43========

To gauge quantitative significance of real-time monitoring of this form, we compare  minimum capital requirements (measured in terms of deposits) for the mimicking strategy,  
, both under perfect competition and under monopoly. Results are summarised in  
Table 2 where  
,  
,  
,  
and  
. For returns under prudent  
investment, we choose  
as in Allen and Gale (2007), 
as in Foster and Young  
(2011) and an intermediate case where  
. 
Regime Monopoly without  monitoring 
R = 2 0.315 
R= 1.5 0.550 
R = 1.04 0.528 
Monopoly with  monitoring 
0 
0.209 
0.522 
Perfect competition 
0.854 
0.693 
0.528 
Table 2: Minimum capital requirements under different regimes 
The first row in Table 2 indicates that, without monitoring, decreasing safe returns, R, increases the minimum prudential capital requirement. This is because smaller R implies a  smaller franchise value, so capital requirements have to be increased to offset this and preserve proper incentives. The second row shows that the effect of introducing real-time  monitoring depends crucially on the franchise value. When this is high (R=2), a moderate  probability of detecting the gamble (30%) can substantially reduce the minimum capital  requirement.28 When the franchise value is low (R=1.04), the effect on the minimum capital  requirement is minimal.  
The third row illustrates minimum capital requirements under perfect competition: as R  
decreases, gambling by using mimicking strategy becomes less attractive, so minimum  
capital requirements decline. Note f irst that, for any given R, the minimum capital  
requirements under perfect competition are generally greater than those under monopoly.  
This is because there is no franchise value under perfect competition; so the gap between  
                                                              
28Similar results are found elsewhere. Thus, in a careful calibration of the Hellmann, Murdock and Stiglitz  (2000) model, Kuvshinov (2011) shows that real time monitoring can reduce minimum capital adequacy ratio  from around 40% to 20%. 
43 

========44========

them shrinks as the franchise value decreases. Note also that, because of the specific form of  the punishment used above, real-time monitoring has no effect on minimum capital  requirements under perfect competition.  
The numerical examples illustrate how the effectiveness of our form of the real-time  monitoring depends on the level of franchise values: becoming ineffective when the franchise  value is low (either because of high degree of competition or low returns on prudent  investment). One way to overcome this would be to impose an alternative (or additional)  sanction in the form of fixed fine, for example, the loss of regulatory capital in the case where  capital requirements are in force. By combining these two forms of sanction, real-time  monitoring could be effective regardless of the level of franchise value. In Kuvshinov (2011),  for example, the assumption that a competitive bank that is gambling will lose all of its equity  capital if caught has the dramatic effect of halving the risk weighted capital requirement even  if the chance of being detected is only 10%. 
These numerical exercises are, however, subject to a major qualification: they take no  account of bank bailouts, so they exaggerate the prudential benefits of concentration. 
44 

========45========

Appendix E. Bailout and the incentive to take on tail risk: a numerical  
illustration 
As our framework assumes monopoly profits even when investing in the prudent asset, the  deposit rate r is set below the prudent rate α. The parameters are as in Hellmann et al (2000)  
with values based on Sinn (2010). 
Prudent Rate α=1.05 Downside of gamble β=0.91 Discount factor δ=0.9 Deposit rate r=1.04 
Payoffs (Bank, Taxpayer) 
Bank 1 
Prudent 
(1.2+δVN=12, 3.8) 
Success 
Bailout: (2.8+δVB =20.98, 3.8) 
Liquidation: (2.8+δVL =12.37, 3.8) 
Expected Payoff for the shareholder:  
Success return on risky asset γ=1.066 Probability of failing gamble π=0.9 Capital holdings of bank k=5 
Innovative 
Nature 
Failure 
Bailout  
Taxpayer Nature 
Liquidation 
(-5+ δVB=14.09,  where b=4 
-4 + b=0)  
(-5, -x) 
Bailout: 0.9* (2.8+δVB)+ 0.1*( -5+ δVB)= 20.9> 12 
Liquidation: 0.9 *(2.8 
δVL)+0.1*( 
-5)= 10.63< 12 
45 

========46========

The profits of a monopoly (concentrated) bank are given by 
Profits: 
Profit of investment in the prudent return: ПN=1.2 
Profits of investment in risky return: ПG=2.8 
Payoffs and Expected Values: 
Prudent: 
Payoff and expected value to bank if it invests in the prudent investment:  EV=1.2+δVN=12 
Bailout: 
Payoff to the bank if it invests in the risky return and assumes to be bailed out (success):  2.8+δVB=20.98 
Payoff to the bank if it invests in the risky return and assumes to be bailed out (failure):   -k+δVB=14.09 
The expected value for the bank of the gamble assuming it will be bailed out becomes  20.29. 
Liquidation: 
Payoff to the bank if it invests in the risky return and assumes liquidation (success):  2.8+δVL=12.36 
Payoff to the bank if it invests in the risky return and assumes to be bailed out (failure):  -k =-5 
The expected value for the bank of the gamble assuming it will be bailed out becomes 10.63. 
It becomes clear that if the bank knows it will be bailed out, risky innovation is preferred, otherwise it  will invest prudently assuming liquidation is the tie breaker for the Taxpayer. 
Note 
46 

========47========

and VB>VN>VL. 
47 

========48========

