January 2012 
No.70 
Too much of a good thing? On the growth effects of the EU's regional policy 
Sascha O. Becker (CAGE, University of Warwick), Peter H. Egger (CAGE, ETH Zurich) and Maximilian von Ehrlich (ETH Zurich) 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Too much of a good thing? On the growth ets of the EU’s regional policy 
Sascha O. Becker CAGE, U Warwick 
Peter H. Egger CAGE, ETH Zurich 
Maximilian von Ehrlich 
ETH Zurich 
January 2012 
Abstract 
The European Union (EU) provides grants to disadvantaged regions of mem- ber states from two pools, the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund. The main goal of the associated transfers is to facilitate convergence of poor re- gions (in terms of per-capita income) to the EU average. We use data at the NUTS3 level from the last two EU budgetary periods (1994-99 and 2000-06) and generalized propensity score estimation to analyze to which extent the goal of fostering growth in the target regions was achieved with the funds pro- vided and whether or not more transfers generated stronger growth e We  that, overall, EU transfers enable faster growth in the recipient re- gions as intended, but we estimate that in 36% of the recipient regions the transfer intensity exceeds the aggregate e maximizing level and in 18% of the regions a reduction of transfers would not even reduce their growth. We conclude that some reallocation of the funds across target regions would lead to higher aggregate growth in the EU and could generate even faster convergence than the current scheme does. 
Keywords: EU regional policy; Regional growth; Generalized propensity score estimation; Quasi-randomized experiment 
JEL Classion: C21; O40; H50; R11 
We gratefully acknowledge numerous useful comments on an earlier version of the manuscript by two anonymous referees and the editor in charge (Theo Eicher). Furthermore, we thank Serguei Kaniovski and Rafal Raciborski for providing us with data. We are indebted to seminar participants at various seminars and conferences. S. Becker gratefully acknowledges  support from the Scottish Institute for Research in Economics (SIRE). M. von Ehrlich gratefully acknowledges  support from the German Science Foundation (DFG). 
Contact information: Becker: s.o.becker@warwick.ac.uk. Becker is also a with Ifo, CEPR, CESifo, and IZA; Egger: egger@kof.ethz.ch. Egger is also a with WIFO, Ifo, CEPR, and CESifo; von Ehrlich: vonEhrlich@kof.ethz.ch. 

========2========

1 Introduction 
As the budget of the European Union (EU) becomes tighter and major recipients of European regional transfers struggle with debt crises, questions about the proper utilization and eeness of transfers from the central EU budget to Europe’s poorest regions are hotly debated. Since 1975, when the European Regional Devel- opment Fund (ERDF) was founded, a signit budget has been devoted to the reduction of regional imbalances, especially, in terms of per-capita income.1 The Treaty of Lisbon which entered into force in 2009 acknowledges regional cohesion as one of the key goals of the European Union.2 
The Union’s regional policy goals are rooted in the perception that a common market requires a certain degree of homogeneity in economic development which is not necessarily an automatic outcome of the integration process but, eventually, has to be assisted by active policy interventions. Accordingly, with the EU enlargements to the south3 and, more recently, to the east,4 the disparities among the member countries of the Union increased sharply, and so did the scope of regional transfers. During the years 1975-88, the ERDF budget represented on average 6.8% of the total Community budget, while during the current 2007-13 programming period expenses aimed at cohesion make up 35.7% of the total Community budget, or 347.41 billion Euros at current prices (see European Commission, 1989, 2008). These expenses on cohesion policy stem from dit funds: the ERDF contributes about 58%, the European Social Fund (ESF) about 22%, and the Cohesion Fund about 20%. The ERDF and the ESF are commonly referred to as the Structural Funds where the former focuses on infrastructure investments and the latter on employment measures.5 The Cohesion Fund was established in the treaty of Maastricht and is intended to support the Structural Funds in strengthening the economic and social cohesion in the Union. The Cohesion Fund mainly  environmental projects and trans-European transport infrastructure networks. In contrast to the Structural 
1The European Social Fund (ESF) and the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) were already founded in 1958 and 1962, respectively, but were focused on speci duties and were limited in scope. The Cohesion Fund was founded as late as 1992. 
2Article 174 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union states: "[...] the Union shall aim at reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favored regions" (see O Journal C 115/127 09/05/2008). 
3Greece joined the EU in 1981, and Spain and Portugal in 1986. 
4Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, the Slovak Republic, and Slovenia joined in 2004, and Bulgaria and Romania in 2007. 
5Until 2006, the Structural Funds included the European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund (EAGGF) and the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance (FIFG) which have been replaced by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) and the European Fisheries Fund (EFF), respectively. Both funds are no longer directly involved in cohesion policy. 
2 

========3========

Funds, the Cohesion Fund operates on the national rather than the regional level.6 
The heterogeneity of regional transfer intensity { de as the amount of EU transfers in percent of a target region’s beginning-of-period GDP { across recipient regions and programming periods is remarkable. Whereas some NUTS3 regions7 received only negligible amounts of EU transfers in the order of less than a thou- sandth of a percent of their GDP, others faced a transfer intensity of 29% of their beginning-of period GDP. We will discuss this heterogeneity in more detail below. 
It is sometimes argued that some regions use EU transfers increasingly ine ciently as they receive more transfers. Due to a lack of administrative capacity, part of the funds is not spent as intended but used for consumption purposes or subject to corruption.8 If there are diminishing returns to EU regional transfers, knowing that they foster growth on average, as in Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich (2010), is not enough.9 In fact, it is important to understand how a varying treat- ment intensity (dit amounts of EU transfers relative to GDP) a regional growth. This will allow us to see up to which level transfers serve the intended goal of fostering regional growth and beyond which a further allocation of funds becomes inet. Estimation of that threshold for the EU’s regional policy programmes 
6Member states qualify for transfers from the Cohesion Fund if their GDP per capita falls below 90% of the community average. The most signit amount of Structural Funds is transferred to regions with a per-capita GDP below 75% of the community average (so-called Objective 1 regions). 
7Eurostat de NUTS3 regions as entities of between 150-800 thousand inhabitants. An exception is large cities with population of more than 800 thousand which are still usually NUTS3 regions in their entirety. The counterpart to a NUTS3 region in the United States would be a county. In France, they represent Departements, in Germany, they are equivalent to Landkreise, in Spain, they correspond to Comunidades Autonomas, and in the United Kingdom, they are associated with the Unitary Authorities. 
8See euobserver.com from October 20, 2009, "EU funds still vulnerable to fraud in Bulgaria", Handelsblatt from March 2, 2010 "Korrumpierter Staatsapparat: EU duldet Griechenlands Betrug seit Jahren", the New York Times from August 23, 2008, "EU cuts back funding to Bulgaria", or euractive.com from December 8, 2008, "Time to redesign the Structural Funds system". 
9Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich (2010) provide an overview of the literature on the e of the EU’s regional transfers and conduct an evaluation of Objective 1 transfers, which make up two thirds of the EU’s Structural Funds Programmes. More speci, Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich (2010) use a binary treatment indicator in a regression discontinuity design to study the causal e of Objective 1 funds on GDP per capita growth in recipient versus non-recipient regions. The discontinuity arises from the rule that EU regions whose GDP per capita falls below 75% of the EU average are eligible for Objective 1 funds whereas regions above the 75% threshold are ineligible. Their results suggest that, in a best-case scenario, Objective 1 transfers generate a multiplier of approximately 1.2 so that every Euro of transfers generates 20 extra cents of GDP. However, that multiplier e relates to Objective 1 treatment only, since other parts of the Structural and Cohesion Funds do not follow a clearly de rule (75% threshold) and do not lend themselves to a regression discontinuity design for identi 
3 

========4========

calls for an identi strategy that goes beyond a binary transfer indicator and exploits variation in transfer intensity. 
An argument for a declining treatment e { and, eventually, existence of a maximum desirable level of regional transfers { arises naturally from neoclassical production theory and the assumption of diminishing returns to investment and investment-stimulating transfers (see Hirshleifer, 1958). Suppose that investment projects are anced and undertaken in the order of expected returns on investment. Then, a bigger number of investment projects carried out would be associated with a lower return to investments (or transfers). If diminishing returns to transfers were relevant, we could identify a maximum desirable level of the treatment intensity. Above that level, no additional (or even lower) per-capita income growth e would be generated than at or below that threshold. 
There is a similar argument for a minimum necessary level of regional transfers which is based on the big-push or poverty-trap theory of development, which states that transfers (or aid) have to exceed a certain threshold in order to become ee. For instance, this would be the case if the marginal product of capital were extremely low at too small levels of infrastructure or human capital (see Sachs, McArthur, Schmidt-Traub, Kruk, Bahadur, Faye, and McCord 2004). Alternatively, this could be the case if regions lagging behind were isolated from other developed regions (see Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny 1989, for arguments along those lines). When applying the big-push or poverty-trap theory to the least-developed NUTS3 regions in the EU, one would expect to  a minimum desirable level of regional transfer intensity only above but not below which transfers generate positive growth e Then, it would be reasonable to allocate more transfers to a few very poor regions in order to ensure that they induce noticeable e 
With regions above a maximum desirable treatment intensity or below a mini- mum necessary treatment intensity, the overall EU budget could be reduced without any negative growth e and, hence, there would be scope for unambiguous ef-  gains. In this analysis we also ask what the empirically optimal transfer intensity is. This will be the transfer level above which an additional Euro trans- ferred yields less than a Euro of additional GDP. Hence, what we dub optimal transfer intensity here is associated with a transfer multiplier of unity. Accordingly, a reallocation of transfers from regions above the optimal transfer intensity to ones below it would enhance aggregate growth (although it might hurt growth in the regions from which transfers are taken away). 
We aim at identifying the functional form of the relationship between EU-NUTS3 regional transfer intensity and per-capita income growth by way of dose-response function estimation.10 Unlike the study of Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich (2010) 
10Earlier studies by Becker, Egger, von Ehrlich, and Fenge (2008) and Hagen and Mohl (2008) 
4 

========5========

and other studies using a binary indicator for EU regional transfer treatment, the dose-response function allows us to ask to which extent the European Commission in conjunction with regional authorities at the national and subnational levels provide and use transfers in an et { here to be interpreted as per-capita-income growth maximizing { way.11 We identify the GDP per-capita growth-maximizing transfer intensity, which allows us to determine how many and which regions receive too much funding and how many and which regions receive too little funding out of the Structural and Cohesion Funds Programme. 
The results for the two programming periods 1994-99 and 2000-06 point to a non-linear relationship between the treatment intensity of EU regional transfers and per-capita GDP growth. More speci, we  evidence of a maximum desirable treatment intensity. At a transfer intensity beyond this level, the null hypothesis of zero (or even negative) growth e induced by additional transfers can no longer be rejected. Contrary to the big push hypothesis, within the EU there is no evidence for the existence of a minimum necessary level of regional transfers to induce positive per-capita income growth e 
The estimates suggest that, up to a maximum desirable treatment intensity of about 1.3% of a region’s GDP, EU transfer receipts from Structural Funds or the Cohesion Fund lead to positive marginal income growth e However, beyond a treatment intensity of 1.3%, per-capita income growth can on average not be in- creased any further through additional EU transfers. About 18% of NUTS3 recipient regions received transfers above that threshold. According to our results, a reallo- cation of the transfers away from those regions would not harm them, but might bene other regions. When applying the stricter criterion of an optimal treatment intensity, we  that transfers should not exceed a treatment intensity of about 0.4%. According to our estimates, the transfer-multiplier fell short of unity for about 36% of the NUTS3 recipient regions across the two periods considered. This leads to the conclusion that there is signit scope for greater e at the level of Structural and Cohesion Funds transfers regarding their growth-maximizing allocation for the Union as a whole as well as its poorest regions. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The next section presents details on the sources and the construction of data at the level of NUTS3 regions for 
used variation in the extent of transfers but did not have access to data at the disaggregated NUTS3 level as we do now, so that robust identi of the functional relationship between EU regional transfer intensity and per-capita income growth e was not possible there. 
11Note that we take the revenue side of the EU budget as given because each country contributes a  percentage of GDP and VAT to the EU budget so taxation is non progressive. Moreover, data on sub-national contributions to the EU budget are not available. Taking the revenue side as given implies that we disregard the (hardly quanti e costs of raising the necessary tax revenue for transfers. 
5 

========6========

the two programming periods 1994-99 and 2000-06. Also, that section summarizes descriptive statistics. Section 3 discusses the econometric methodology applied for the identiion of causal e of the EU’s regional transfers on growth. Section 4 presents the results and interprets the  against the background of e. The last section concludes with a summary of the most important  
2 Data and descriptive statistics 
Our data stem from several sources. Information on EU transfers to NUTS3 re- gions has been kindly provided by ESPON (European Spatial Planning Observation Network) and the European Commission. We link those data to various regional characteristics from Cambridge Econometrics’ Regional Database and a measure of countries’ voting power in the EU Council (measured by the Shapley-Shubik (1954) index) which is taken from Felsenthal and Machover (1998) for the  programming period and and from Widgren (2009) for the second programming period. 
In total, our data-set consists of 2,280 region-programming-period observations out of which 2,078 received transfers through one of the two programmes considered here (Structural Funds or Cohesion Fund). Of the 2,078 treated units, 702 classify as Objective 1 regions which received the lion’s share of total EU transfers considered (74% on average across the two programming periods). 363 of the 2,078 treated units received transfers from the Cohesion Fund. Table 1 provides details on the number and characteristics of NUTS3 regions during the two programming periods 1994-99 and 2000-06. We pool the two programming periods for the sake of greater precision of the estimated relationship between treatment intensity and per-capita income growth. By design, NUTS3 regions of EU member countries as of 1999 are observed twice in the data while EU entrants during 2000-06 are observed only once. Accordingly, we adjust standard errors of parameters and con bounds of treatment e to account for such repeated observations. Pooling more than two budgetary periods for NUTS3 regions is infeasible since detailed information on treatment intensity for programming periods prior to 1994-99 is not available at the required disaggregated level. 
TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE 
Table 1 displays the average annual transfers per treated NUTS3 region adjusting for the number of years the respective regions actually received transfers. The reason for this adjustment is that Austria, Finland, and Sweden joined the EU only in 1995 and did not receive transfers for the whole programming period 1994-99. The same is true for the accession countries in 2004 that did not receive transfers for 
6 

========7========

the whole 2000-06 programming period. As mentioned before, 2,078 of the 2,280 covered EU-NUTS3 region-programming-period observations received transfers from either the Structural Funds or Cohesion Fund budgets. Table 1 shows that the transfer intensity in these 2,078 units varied dramatically. Whereas the Greek region of Grevena displayed a transfer intensity of 29.057% in the 1994-99 programming period, the Swedish region of Hallands lan received EU transfers of only .00009% { or 5,345 Euros { in the programming period 2000-06. This variation in NUTS3 regional transfer intensity has three roots:  the variation in GDP (and per- capita GDP) across NUTS3 regions; second, the variation in transfers to countries, NUTS2 regions,12 and NUTS3 regions as provided by the European Commission;13 third, the discretion at the national level or the level of NUTS2 regions about the allocation of funds to NUTS3 entities which fall into their jurisdiction. 
The EU spent about 21,934 mn. Euros on regional transfers per annum (out of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund programmes) across the two periods under consideration, of which 2,952 mn. Euros were spent through the Cohesion Fund and 18,982 mn. Euros were transferred through the Structural Funds pro- grammes. Objective 1 regions received about 16,301 mn. Euros from the central EU budget per annum across the two periods.14 
When using the respective relevant GDP of the year prior to the start of the pro- gramming period in the denominator, the average annual regional transfer intensity amounted to 0.759% for all regional transfers, to 1.991% for Objective 1 transfers only, and to 0.659% for Cohesion Fund transfers. While most of the NUTS3 regions received some transfers from the central budget, there is considerable variation in the 
12NUTS2 regions are somewhat larger clusters of NUTS3 regions with 0.8 to 3 million inhabi- tants. 
13For some types of transfers, such as those falling under the auspices of Objective 1 in the Structural Funds Programmes, eligibility for transfers is determined at the level of NUTS2 regions (with a few exceptions which determine transfers to NUTS3 regions; see Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich, 2010, for a detailed description of the rules for Objective 1 treatment). Other types of transfers are determined at the NUTS3 level or the national level. 
14Note that these  refer to the transfers the 
EU spent annually and can not be directly compared to the  in Table 1 which refer to the average annual funds recipient regions received. The latter adjusts for the number of years regions actually received funds. For that, we calculate transfers in 1994-99 divided by 6 or 5 for the EU12 and for the three new EU15 members, respectively, and transfers in 2000-06 divided by 7 or 3 for the EU15 and for the ten new EU25 members, respectively, before we pool the data and take the average across all observations. In total, there are 12,477 region-year observations with positive transfers. Multiplying the average annual transfers in Figure 1 with 12,477 and dividing by 13 (the number of years covered by the two programming periods) yields approximately the annual funds the EU spent but does not take into account that regions which received transfers in less than 13 years may have received higher or lower annual funds than other regions in those years they were eligible for funding. 
7 

========8========

transfer intensity as indicated above. Figure 1 displays the geographical distribution of total EU transfer per GDP for both programming periods under consideration. 
In the subsequent analysis, we focus on those 2,078 observations that received regional transfers through either the Structural Funds or the Cohesion Fund pro- grammes. As can be seen from the  row of Table 1, those regions’ per-capita income measured at Purchasing Power Parity grew by about 4.2% per annum during the two considered programming periods.15 However, there is a fair amount of vari- ation in the data. Table 1 suggests that the minimum growth rate across NUTS3 regions re a decline by almost 4% per annum while the maximum growth rate was almost 14% per annum within the sample period. 
FIGURE 1 AND TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE 
In our empirical analysis we employ various covariates: the GDP per-capita level (at purchasing power parity, PPP) prior to the respective programming period, total regional employment, sectoral employment, population density, a measure of countries’ voting power in the EU, a period dummy and a variable that indicates whether a region is located at the EU border. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the data used, where per-capita GDP, and the employment information are measured in logarithmic terms. 
3 Generalized propensity scores 
3.1 Methodology 
To estimate the causal e of transfer intensity on per-capita income growth, we resort to generalized propensity score (GPS) estimation, a non-parametric method to estimate treatment e conditional on observable determinants of treatment intensity. Propensity score matching represents a well-suited econometric technique for policy evaluation as it is able to correct for selection bias into dit levels of treatment intensity by comparing units that are similar in terms of their observ- able characteristics. Following the seminal paper by Rosenbaum and Rubin (1983) propensity score matching became very popular in the case of binary treatment (see, e.g., Heckman, Ichimura, and Todd, 1997; Dehejia and Wahba, 1999). The binary case was extended to categorial multivalued treatment by Imbens (2000) and, more recently, to continuous treatments (see Hirano and Imbens 2004; Imai and van Dyk, 
15Per-capita income growth is expressed as an average change in log-transformed per-capita income. 
8 

========9========

2004).16 In the following, we outline the method developed by Hirano and Imbens (2004) and apply it to our research question. 
Index the regions by i = 1; : : : ; N and consider the unit-level dose-response func- tion of outcomes Yi() (annual per-capita income growth) as a function of treatments  2 T (transfer intensity). We focus on 0 > 0 , i.e., regions with positive transfers. In the binary case, the treatment would be restricted to T = f0;1g. However, our objective is not to analyze whether or not receiving transfers at all boosts growth, but to what extent a higher treatment intensity yields stronger or weaker e than a lower treatment intensity. Furthermore, we want to derive the optimal treat- ment intensity. Employing the generalized propensity score methodology, we aim at estimating the average dose-response function across all regions i, () = E[Yi()]. 
The key challenge is to compare regions with sutly similar characteristics but dit treatment intensity in order to construct a quasi-experimental setting. For each observation i we observe the vector of covariates Xi, the treatment intensity Ti, and the outcome corresponding to the level of treatment received, Yi = Yi(Ti). Let us drop index i for simplicity and assume that Y ()2T ; T; X is de on a common probability space,  is continuously distributed with respect to a Lebesgue measure on T , and Y = Y (T) is a well de random variable. 
For such a setting, the concept of unconfoundedness for binary treatments was generalized by Hirano and Imbens (2004) to one of weak unconfoundedness for con- tinuous treatments 
Y () ? T j X for all  2 T : (1) 
Regions di in their characteristics X such that some are more or less likely to receive a high treatment intensity than others. Weak unconfoundedness means that, after controlling for observable characteristics X, any remaining dice in treat- ment intensity T across regions is independent of the potential outcomes Y (). Equation (1) is referred to as weak unconfoundedness because it does not require joint independence of all potential outcomes, Y ()2[ 
conditional independence to hold at given treatment levels. 
0;1]; T; X. Instead, it requires 
The generalized propensity score is de as 
R = r(T; X); 
(2) 
where r(; x) = fTjX(jx) is the conditional density of the treatment given the covariates. Similar to the conventional propensity score with binary treatments, the generalized propensity score is assumed to have a balancing property which requires that, within strata of r(; X), the probability that T =  does not depend on the 
16See Becker and Muendler (2008) and Kluve, Schneider, Uhlendor and Zhao (2011) for recent applications of GPS estimation in dirent contexts. 
9 

========10========

value of X. In other words, when looking at two observations with the same ex ante probability (conditional on observable characteristics X) of being exposed to a particular treatment intensity, their actual treatment intensity is independent of X. That is, the generalized propensity score summarizes all information in the multi-dimensional vector X so that 
X ? 1fT = g j r(; X): 
(3) 
This is a mechanical property of the generalized propensity score, and does not require unconfoundedness. In combination with weak unconfoundedness, the bal- ancing property implies that assignment to treatment is weakly unconfounded given the generalized propensity score: if assignment to treatment is weakly unconfounded given pre-treatment characteristics X, then 
fT(jr(; X); y(T)) = fT(jr(; X)) (4) 
for every  (see Hirano and Imbens, 2004, for a proof). Hence, we can evaluate the generalized propensity score at a given treatment level by considering the conditional density of the respective treatment level . In that sense, we use as many propensity scores as there are treatment levels, but never more than a single score at one treatment level. 
We eliminate biases associated with di in the covariates in two steps (for a proof that the procedure removes bias, see Hirano and Imbens, 2004): 
1.  Estimate the conditional expectation of per-capita income growth as a function 
of two scalar variables, the treatment level T and the generalized propensity 
score R, (; r) = E[yjT = ; R = r]. 
2.  Estimate the dose-response function at a particular level of the treatment in- 
tensity by averaging this conditional expectation over the generalized propen- 
sity score at that particular level of treatment intensity, () = E[(; r(; X))]. 
For the latter, one does not average over the generalized propensity score R = r(T; X), but over the score evaluated at the treatment level of interest, r(; X). In other words, one   and averages over Xi and r(; Xi) 8i. 
3.2 Estimating the generalized propensity score and the bal- 
ancing of covariates 
In the following, we apply the methodology outlined above to our data-set of 2,078 NUTS3-programming-period observations receiving dit levels of transfers from 
10 

========11========

the European central budget. The treatment intensity of interest, Ti, is the average annual amount of EU transfers relative to the NUTS3 level GDP prior to the begin- ning of the respective programming period (see Table 1 for a summary of treatment intensities). Following Hirano and Imbens (2004), we assume a normal distribution for the treatment intensity given the covariates: 
Ti j Xi 
 N(0 + Xi1; 2): 
(5) 
where Xi is a row vector and 1 a column vector. Since the empirical distribu- tion of EU regional transfers per GDP is positively skewed, we chose a logarithmic transformation. According to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test (and other conventional test statistics), the log-transformed treatment intensity variable does not violate the assumption of normality. As determinants of treatment intensity, we employ the fol- lowing observables in Xi. First of all, we use log GDP per capita (at Purchasing Power Parity) measured prior to the respective programming period. This variable should be included, since it matters for the treatment assignment rule for some types of EU transfers.17 To allow for a nonlinear relationship between treatment intensity and log per-capita income, we include a quadratic and a cubic of log GDP per capita along with the main e Moreover, we include the Shapley-Shubik (1954) index of a country’s voting power prior to a budgetary period to account for e of power-play and lobbying at the country level. Finally, we include several variables characterizing the economic structure of a region such as log employment, log industrial employment, log service employment, an EU border dummy, and pop- ulation density (measured as inhabitants per square kilometer) prior to a budgetary period.18 The economic structure of a region is considered to be a key determinant of regional transfers. Table 2 summarizes moments (such as mean, standard devia- tion, minimum, and maximum) of the distribution of these variables. In Appendix A we perform a sensitivity analysis which takes into account regional infrastructure endowments as well as data on regional environmental issues as determinants of EU regional transfer intensity. The estimated relationships turn out qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the benchmark results which exploit a larger sample.19 
17For instance, NUTS2 regions qualify for Objective 1 transfers if their per-capita GDP falls short of 75% of the EU average. Moreover, the level of GDP per capita prior to a programming period is a key determinant of subsequent per-capita income growth which we should condition on in order to isolate the impact of transfer intensity on growth. 
18In a sensitivity analysis, we used employment shares instead of log employment levels. All results are qualitatively and quantitatively insensitive to this choice. However, we use the log-level speci in the paper as it  the data on treatment intensity better in terms of R2 than a model using employment shares. 
19Data on regional infrastructure endowments and, especially, data on environmental character- istics are missing for a number of regions. Hence, the corresponding augmented treatment intensity 
11 

========12========

We estimate equation (5) by ordinary least squares as reported in Table 3. Using the observable variables in Table 2 plus a constant, we can explain regional transfer intensity fairly well. According to Table 3, the included covariates explain about 56% of the variation in treatment intensity. All of the covariates except one, namely an indicator variable identifying regions at the EU border, exert a signit impact on treatment intensity at least at 10% (using two-tailed test statistics and robust standard errors). 
TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE 
Building on this estimation, the GPS is calculated as 
 
R^i = p 
1 
exp2^2  
1 
2^2(Ti 
 0 
^ 
 Xi^1)2 
 
: 
(6) 
As stated above, the GPS allows us to remove any bias in the estimate of the dose-response function, E[Yi()], if the covariates are sutly balanced. That is, equation (3) has to be satis Furthermore, focusing on the common-support re- gion between treated and control units in the sample is helpful. This avoids perfect predictability of the treatment intensity given a speci value of the GPS. Within the common-support region, units with a certain treatment intensity and respective propensity scores have counterparts with similar GPS but dit treatment in- tensity. In the following, we illustrate that focusing on the common-support region and controlling for the GPS improves comparability of observations with dit treatment intensity tremendously in the data at hand. 
To assess the performance of the GPS, Hirano and Imbens (2004) suggest to organize the data in groups of treatment intensity. We chose to discretize the treat- ment intensity according to the quartiles of the distribution which leaves us with four treatment groups. The  and the third group consist of 520 observations, respec- tively, while the second and fourth group consist of 519 observations, respectively. As is illustrated in Table 4, these groups di starkly in the observed covariates. The four columns report t-statistics on whether the mean of each covariate in the respective group is signitly dit from the mean of the covariates in the three other groups. According to Table 4, only 8 of the 40 t-values are lower than 1.96. Overall, 80% of the observables display a signit dience between treated units in a given group and control units with a treatment intensity belonging to another 
models in the Appendix exploit variation from a smaller data sample. This limits the scope of con- clusions for economic policy in an unnecessary way, since the functional form of the dose-response function is quite similar to the one based on the more parsimonious benchmark speci of regional transfer treatment intensity. 
12 

========13========

group when using two-tailed test statistics and a 5-percent signicance level. The median t-value across all tests is 3.46 and the average mean t-value is 7.76. Ac- cordingly, ex ante, the risk of biased causal inference with continuous treatments is particularly large due to such stark di in observables determining treatment intensity. 
Choosing a coarser or  classi by assigning the observations to fewer or more treatment groups does not a our results in a decisive way. In Appendix B we report the results for sensitivity checks with three and e treatment groups instead of four groups as used in the main text. 
TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE 
For each treatment group j 2 f1;2;3;4g we calculate the median treatment intensity TjM and evaluate the GPS for the whole sample at median treatment intensities. Hence, we calculate R^i(TjM; Xi) for each group j and each observa- tion i = 1; : : : ; N using the estimates ^0;^1;^2 reported in Table 3. We test the common-support condition by plotting the GPS values R^ 
j 
k(TM; Xk) where 
k 2 j for observations k being part of group j, against the GPS values R^l(TjM; Xl) where l 62 j of observations l not belonging to group j. Both the GPS of observations k and the GPS of observations l are evaluated at the median treatment intensity of group j (TjM). Only observations l 62 j and observations k 2 j featuring GPS values with common support are used for estimation of the dose-response function. Hence, we only use observations l for which 
MinfR^k(TjM; Xk)g  R^l(TjM; Xl)  MaxfR^k(TjM; Xk)g 8j 2 f1;2;3;4g 
holds true, where k 2 j and l 62 j. Put ditly, we require compared obser- vations to display a sut degree of similarity in the observable characteristics determining treatment intensity. 
FIGURES 2 AND 3 ABOUT HERE 
The histogram of GPS values evaluated at median treatment intensities of each group are illustrated in Figure 2, where the yellow bars represent observations of group j and the black bars represent all other observations not belonging to j. We display separate histograms for each group j 2 f1;2;3;4g. As can be seen in Figure 2, in groups 2 and 3 there are black bars outside the range of the yellow bars, i.e. there are control observations outside the common support. Similarly, in groups 1 and 4, there are control observations outside the common support. This cannot be seen in the  because the lack of common support occurs in the left half of the 
13 

========14========

lowest bar. In the following analysis, we restrict our sample to observations that satisfy the common-support condition. 
Geographically, these observations often turn out to be NUTS3 regions in the new member countries of the EU. Figure 3 indicates which NUTS3 regions are inside (in white) or outside of the common-support region in a given programming period (in red). Figure 3 suggests that the regions outside the common support are typically peripheral ones in any of the two budgetary periods. When using the GPS to construct comparable units of observation, we  that there are 1,693 of the 2,078 region-programming-period units with common support. 
After imposing the common-support condition, we check whether the gener- alized propensity scores achieve a suent balancing of covariates and thereby eliminate the selection bias potentially a the dose-response function esti- mates. As explained above, four groups are determined on the basis of the variation in the continuous regional transfer intensity. In addition, we determine 10 blocks within each group based on the estimated GPS. We de the blocks for each group j 2 f1;2;3;4g by the deciles of the GPS evaluated at the median of the group R^ (Tjk 
M) where 
k 2 j. Then, we assign each observation i 2 N to the respective block according to its GPS evaluated at TjM. Note that the blocks are determined for each group separately, and only \treated" observations that are part of the re- spective group are relevant for the calculation of the deciles. By design, the sum of observations over blocks in a group yields the total number of observations in that group. 
TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE 
Table 5 illustrates the group-and-block structure generated from this algorithm. For instance, the  of the 10 blocks has in total 678 observations of which 40 are located in group 1 and 638 in all other groups together. Taking the sum over all blocks and adding the respective group and control observations yields the total number of 1,693 observations in the common-support region. An organization of the data in this way helps identifying comparable observations with the same pre- dicted treatment intensity (blocks) but dint actual treatment intensity (groups). Following Hirano and Imbens (2004) to test the balancing property, we compare ob- served characteristics of units within a speci block of predicted transfer intensity across groups of actual treatment intensity. For instance, we compare the 40 ob- servations in cell group 1/block 1 to the 678 observations in cell control 1/block 1 and test for equality of covariates. Accordingly, we conduct 10 two-tailed t-tests for each group across all covariates. Table 6 reports the mean t-statistics for each group across all covariates, where we weight the t-statistics by the number of observations in the respective block in order to calculate the mean t-statistic. 
14 

========15========

TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE 
The degree of bias reduction through matching on the GPS is considerable. This can be seen from a comparison of the t-values in Table 6 which contrasts units within the support region after matching based on the GPS with the respective ones in Table 4 before matching. While the median and average absolute t-values were 3.46 and 7.79, respectively, in Table 4, the corresponding values in Table 6 are 0.53 and 0.63, respectively. Before matching, almost all t-values were statistically signit while only 2 out of 40 t-values remain marginally signit after controlling for the GPS.20 Accordingly, we argue that the estimated generalized propensity scores perform well in reducing potential treatment-intensity selection bias. 
3.3 Estimating the dose-response function 
After having largely removed selection bias into dit treatment intensities, we can proceed to estimating and visualizing the relationship between regional transfer intensity and regional GDP growth. To do so, the following \second-stage" regres- sion model speci the conditional expectation of Yi given Ti and Ri: 
E[YijTi; Ri] = 0 + 1Ti + 2T2i + 3T3i + 4R^i + 5R^2i + 6R^3i + 7R^iTi; 
(7) 
using the GPS values estimated in the  stage (R^i) and the observed treatment intensities (Ti). The parameters are estimated by ordinary least squares, where we implement a block-bootstrap procedure (with 1,000 replications) which takes into account that the GPS is not observed but estimated and that some NUTS3 regions are repeatedly observed across programming periods. The GPS terms in the regres- sion are the ones \controlling" for selection into treatment intensities. If selectivity indeed matters, we expect those terms to be jointly statistically signit. In Table 7, we show coet estimates from equation 7 and  that all GPS-based poly- nomial terms matter both individually as well as jointly. Hence, GPS estimation is indeed relevant and signitly reduces the bias of the estimated response of per-capita income growth to changes in regional transfer intensity. 
TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE 
20It might be possible to improve the balancing property even further by either using more than 10 blocks or eliminating extreme per-capita income growth rates from the distribution. However, using too many blocks may lead to a small-sample bias of the estimates. We have experimented with dropping units with extreme values of per-capita income growth, but this does not have a visible impact on the estimated non-parametric dose-response function. Hence, to avoid a small- sample bias and an ad-hoc judgment about sample trimming, we decided to use 10 blocks and not drop further observations from the data when assessing the balancing property. 
15 

========16========

With the parameters estimated in the second stage, we can now estimate the average potential outcome at treatment level , the so-called dose-response function: 
XN 
E[Y] = 
[ 
1 
N 
[^0+^1+^22+^33+^4R^(; Xi)+^5R^2(; Xi)+^6R^3(; Xi)+^7R^(; Xi)] 
i=1 
(8) In addition to the dose-response function itself we display its derivative with respect to the regional transfer intensity { which is commonly referred to as the treatment ect function. The latter allows us to infer the aforementioned minimum neces- sary, the optimal, and the maximum desirable treatment intensities of EU regional transfers. 
4 Results 
4.1 Estimates for total EU regional transfers 
The dose-response function based on the GPS is a non-parametric estimate of the functional relationship between per-capita income growth and regional trans- fer intensity, and so is the treatment e function. Figure 4 displays each of those two nonparametric functions in the center as well as the corresponding block- bootstrapped 90% con interval. Figure 4 is obtained for all EU regional transfers at the NUTS3 level under the auspices of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund as in Tables 3-7. 
According to the dose-response function in the left panel of Figure 4, the response of regional per-capita income growth increases monotonically with regional transfer intensity. However, a marginal increase of transfer intensity at a given transfer level does not necessarily lead to statistically signitly higher per-capita income growth. This can be seen from the derivative of the dose-response function with respect to transfer intensity in the right panel of Figure 4. Since the dose-response function is concave, the treatment e function declines monotonically. The 90% con band of the treatment e function includes zero per-capita income growth at a treatment intensity of about or more than 1.3%. The latter level is indicated by a dotted black bar in the treatment e plot of Figure 4. Below this regional transfer intensity level, an increase in regional transfer intensity leads to an unambiguous increase in the per-capita income growth response. NUTS3 regions with a regional transfer intensity of more than 1.3% do no longer unambiguously gain from additional EU transfers. In other words, for regions above the 1.3% threshold, a reduction of EU transfers to 1.3% of their GDP would not necessarily harm their growth prospects. 
16 

========17========

The estimated dose-response function also con the results of our previous study where we concluded that transfers under the Objective 1 scheme raised annual growth in the recipient regions on average by about 1.6 percentage points (see Becker, Egger, and von Ehrlich, 2010). In our data-set, Objective 1 regions received on average EU transfers in the amount of 1.9% of their GDP per annum. At such a transfer intensity, the dose-response function in Figure 4 predicts an annual growth response of about 5.1% for the average Objective 1 region. The non-Objective 1 regions in our data-set had an average annual growth rate of about 3.6% which yields an average treatment e of Objective 1 treatment of about 1.5 percentage points. Accordingly, the magnitudes of the average treatment e as derived from the regression discontinuity design and from the generalized propensity score approach are quite similar. Yet, as argued above, the dose-response function provides insights beyond those of our earlier study which aimed at estimating a homogeneous local average treatment e 
FIGURE 4 ABOUT HERE 
The results in Figure 4 also point to the existence of a maximum desirable level of regional transfers in terms of target region GDP beyond which the per-capita income growth stimulus becomes unimportant so that additional transfers, on average, are wasted. Of all 2,078 observations receiving transfers in the two considered program- ming periods (this number includes units within and outside of the common-support region applied in Figure 4), 1,698 display a transfer intensity below the maximum de- sirable level of 1.3%, and 380 units are treated in excess of 1.3%. The sum of regional transfers to those 380 observations amounted to 148,450.38 mn. Euros. Suppose the European Commission had limited the transfers to those 380 observations to exactly 1.3% of their initial GDP. This would have entailed a reduction of transfers by 32,237.091 mn. Euros in the  programming period and by 31,716.078 mn. Euros in the second programming period. Suppose that the European Commission had used those saved funds in a  neutral way and spent it in other regions so as to promote aggregate growth in the Union. Ignoring region size, the Commis- sion would then have allocated the saved funds to the regions with a low regional transfer intensity. Suppose the Commission had allocated the funds to the 25% regions with the lowest transfer intensity in each programming period. In 1994-99 these were 272 regions featuring an average treatment intensity of about 0.014% and in 2000-06 these were 248 regions featuring an average treatment intensity of about 0.026%. Moreover, assume that the reallocation had been administered so as to provide each of these regions with the same annual transfer intensity after 
17 

========18========

redistribution.21 Then, the average treatment intensity could have been increased by 0.246 and 0.164 percentage points in the  and in the second programming pe- riod, respectively, without any additional funds required.22 According to our point estimates in Tables 3 and 7 this would have raised annual growth in the average region bene from this kind of redistribution by about 1.12 percentage points in the  programming period and by about 0.76 percentage points in the second programming period. Since the reduction of transfers to recipient regions above a transfer intensity of 1.3 percent should not a their growth rates in a signit way, this kind of redistribution would have entailed unambiguous e gains. 
Another important concept is what we dubbed the optimal transfer intensity which was de as the threshold where an additional Euro transferred yields exactly one Euro of additional GDP in the average recipient region. Accordingly, the optimal transfer intensity has to satisfy the condition 
@E[[Y] @ 
@ @= 
= ln(GDP + 1) 
E[ 
ln(GDP) , 
@ [Y] 
@ 
 0:01; 
(9) 
where = is the absolute level of transfers,  = 
= 
GDP 
100, and 
@E\[Y] 
@ 
is the treatment e function as displayed in the right panel of Figure 4.23 If the treatment e function exceeds 0.01, an additional Euro of transfers boosts GDP in the recipient region by more than one Euro such that a higher level of regional redistribution would bene the Union’s total GDP. On the contrary, if the treatment e func- tion falls short of 0.01, an additional Euro transferred yields less than a Euro in a recipient region such that the volume of transfers is inetly high. 
The optimal transfer intensity is indicated by a dotted black bar in right panel of Figure 4. Across the two periods under consideration the optimal transfer intensity 
21This kind of reallocation generates the biggest possible e for those regions given that leapfrogging is to be avoided. 
22In the  programming period, the targeted 272 regions would have received transfers for 6 years. These regions featured an average GDP of 8,230.146 mn. Euros and received average annual transfers of 1.505 mn. Euros. By the mentioned redistribution scheme, the treatment intensity in those regions could have been raised to about (27261:505mn.e+ 32;237:091mn.e)=(2726 8;230:146mn.e)  100 = 0:26% in the  programming period. The 248 targeted regions in the second programming period would have received transfers for 7 years. These regions featured an average GDP of 10,995.18 mn. Euros and received average annual transfers of 2.308 mn. Euros. In those regions, the transfer intensity could have been raised by the mentioned reallocation scheme to about (248  7  2:308mn.e + 31;716:078mn.e)=(248  7  10;995:18mn.e)  100 = 0:19% in the second programming period. 
23Other things equal, an additional Euro boosts the growth rate by 1 
GDP 
and the percentage transfer intensity by 
100 
GDP 
such that the optimal transfer intensity is reached where the estimated treatment e function 
@ E\[Y] 
@ 
equals 0.01. 
18 

========19========

in Figure 4 amounts to about 0.4% of regional GDP. Note that a transfer intensity above the optimum desirable level may still be below the maximum desirable transfer intensity so that a given recipient region with a transfer intensity in that range may still signitly bene from additional EU transfers. 
While the maximum desirable transfer intensity requires only a signit im- pact on recipient regions, the optimal transfer intensity requires a transfer multiplier above one. Hence, the latter concept is closely linked to aggregate ey. Sup- pose the European Union’s single objective had been aggregate growth in the two programming periods under consideration. Then, the Union should have cut trans- fers to regions with a transfer intensity in excess of 0.4% (344 and 397 regions in the 1994-99 and 2000-06 programming periods, respectively) and have raised transfers to regions below the optimal transfer intensity (741 and 596 regions in the 1994-99 and 2000-06 programming periods, respectively). Yet, such a policy would have been in con with the political goal of regional cohesion, since it would have implied a reallocation of transfers from less developed regions with a high transfer intensity to rather prosperous regions with a low transfer intensity. Such a trade-o between regional cohesion and aggregate e would have been pertinent for 162 regions in the 1994-99 period and 199 in the 2000-06 period featuring a transfer intensity above the optimal level but below the maximum desirable level.24 In any case, ac- cording to the reported estimates, cutting transfers to regions beyond the maximum desirable transfer intensity enhances ecy without harming regional cohesion. 
Using NUTS3-level data on the gap between a region’s per-capita income level to the (unweighted) average and the transfer intensity together with the estimated treatment function in Figure 4, we can classify regions along two dimensions. First, regions with a transfer multiplier smaller than unity (i.e., regions to the right of the red dotted line in Figure 4) and regions with a transfer multiplier of unity or greater than that (i.e., regions at or to the left of the red dotted line in Figure 4). Second, regions with a non-positive per-capita income gap (i.e., ones with a real per-capita income of or below the EU average) and ones with a positive per-capita income gap (i.e., regions with a per-capita income above the unweighted EU average across NUTS3 units). This classi of regions leads to four possible regimes in a given programming period.25 Applying the estimated treatment e function 
24Note also that the value of the treatment intensity where the upper bound of the displayed con interval is equal to .01 (i.e. the value where the multiplier is unity; see (9)) is below the maximum desirable treatment intensity. The fact that the upper bound of the optimal treat- ment intensity lies below the maximum desirable treatment intensity indicates that there is, for some regions, a trade-o between aggregate e and regional cohesion (see Martin, 1999 and Boldrin and Canova, 2001 for a theoretical elaboration on this trade-o). 
25There is a  group of NUTS3 regions, namely the ones which did not get any transfers as considered in this study in a given programming period. 
19 

========20========

to all regions including the ones outside of the common support of the generalized propensity score, we may determine which group a NUTS3 region belongs to. 
FIGURE 5 ABOUT HERE 
Figure 5 illustrates the outcome for the two programming periods NUTS3-level transfer data are available for. In essence, the results from this study suggest that { in pursuit of the two goals of an ee use of funds and the closure of the per-capita income gap within the Union { the European Commission and national governments together might have reduced transfers to regions which are colored light-red and, even more so, dark-red, and have reallocated those transfers to the dark-blue regions. The  suggest that the two aforementioned goals could have been followed in a better way if { with a few exceptions { transfers had been reallocated from the geographical periphery of the EU towards its core in both the 1994-99 and the 2000-06 programming periods. The reason for this outcome is that many of the poorest regions in the Union display a much weaker response to transfers than ones that are closer to but still below the Union’s average per-capita income level in the geographical core. 
4.2 Estimates for speci treatments 
We can produce similar estimates for dit sub-components of the EU transfer budget. Since Structural Funds transfers account for the lion’s share (about 87% on average) of all of the EU’s regional transfers, the results for all transfers and Struc- tural Funds transfers alone are very similar. However, we can consider somewhat smaller budgets such as transfers to Objective 1 regions (which account for about 74% of all EU-administered regional transfers) and, alternatively, for Cohesion Fund transfers (about 13% of total transfers). Again, we can estimate the dose-response function and the treatment e function.26 
FIGURE 6 ABOUT HERE 
Panels A and B in Figure 6 summarize the results for transfers to Objective 1 regions and Cohesion fund transfers, respectively, akin to Figure 4 for all transfers. Either one of the two  displays a similar pattern. First of all, neither the dose- response function nor the treatment e function is monotonic but hump-shaped. 
26Obviously, the validity of GPS estimation again depends on balancing of the covariates as with all regional transfers. For the sake of brevity, we suppress the documentation of balancing here, but results are available from the authors upon request. It turns out that the balancing property tests are as successfully met as in the case of all EU regional transfers combined. 
20 

========21========

In particular, the con bands of the treatment e function cross the abscissa twice. Hence, the  suggest that there is a minimum necessary level of transfer treatment in the two sub-categories and a maximum desirable level. However, one reason for the existence of the former is that the number of observations with a very low treatment intensity is relatively small and the estimated variance in response is relatively large for those units. Hence, the statistical evidence of existence of a maximum desirable treatment level is stronger than the one of a minimum neces- sary one. According to Figure 6, the maximum desirable treatment threshold is at about 1.8% for Objective 1 regional transfers and at about 0.61% for Cohesion Fund transfers. 
5 Conclusions 
This paper focuses on the estimation of the response of average annual GDP per capita growth to changes in the intensity of regional transfers provided by the Eu- ropean Commission under the auspices of the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund programmes. We use NUTS3 data, the most disaggregated regional data available, covering the two budgetary periods 1994-99 and 2000-06. Nonparametric gener- alized propensity score analysis allows us to estimate the causal e of dit levels of EU transfers on regional per-capita income growth. 
Our results point to an optimal transfer intensity of 0.4% of target region GDP and a maximum desirable intensity of 1.3%. Additional transfers to regions below a transfer intensity of 0.4% enhance aggregate e as they exhibit a multiplier above one. Regions with an EU transfer intensity below 1.3% of their beginning- of-period GDP could grow faster in response to additional EU transfers. Regions with a transfer intensity of more than 1.3% of GDP could give up EU transfers without experiencing a signit drop in their average annual per-capita income growth rate. For a certain range of transfer intensities, we detect a trade-o between aggregate e and regional cohesion. Reducing the transfers to regions below the maximum desirable transfer intensity signitly harms their growth prospects but may enhance aggregate e, if the transfer intensity is above the optimal level. A reallocation of EU transfers from the 18% of regions that received more than 1.3% of their initial GDP as EU transfers to regions below that threshold would have been et and could have boosted regional convergence even further in the two considered programming periods. 
21 

========22========

Table 1: EU Regional Transfers and GDP per Capita Growth in NUTS3 Regions 
Mean Std. dev. Min Max Treated obs. 
Annual transfers per treated region 
Sample: all regions receiving EU transfers from either Structural Funds or Cohesion Funds budget 
Total EU transfers (mn. Euros) 23.141 49.744 0.005 778.531 2,078 Total EU transfers/GDP (%) .759 1.512 .00009 29.057 2,078 
Sample: regions receiving EU transfers from the Structural Funds budget under the Objective 1 heading Objective 1 transfers (mn. Euros) 52.131 68.869 0.603 778.531 702 Objective 1 transfers/GDP (%) 1.991 2.103 .076 29.057 702 
Sample: regions receiving EU transfers from the Cohesion Funds budget 
Cohesion Fund transfers (mn. Euros) 21.479 36.090 0.018 334.935 363 Cohesion Fund transfers/GDP(%) .659 .950 .002 6.338 363 
Annual GDP per capita growth .042 .017 -.039 .138 2,078 
Notes: Our pooled sample consists of 1,091 EU15 NUTS3 regions in the 1994-99 programming period and 1,213 EU25 NUTS3 regions in the 2000-06 programming period. We miss information on the four French overseas-departements and the two autonomous Portuguese regions Madeira and Azores for both periods. In the second period we loose 12 regions that cannot be assigned to the 1994-99 data due to a territorial reform in Saxony-Anhalt. Hence, in total we have 2,280 treated and untreated observations. In order to obtain annual transfers per GDP we divide the annual transfers by the GDP prior to the start of the respective programming period. This is 1993 for the EU12 in the  period but 1994 for the countries joining in 1995 (Austria, Finland, and Sweden), and 1999 for the EU15 in the second period but 2003 for the accession countries of 2004. Moreover, we adjust for the number of years the respective countries actually received funds. This is 6 years for the EU12 in the  period and 5 years for the countries joining in 1995, and 7 years for the EU15 but 3 years for the new accession countries of 2004 in the second period. 
22 

========23========

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics 
Mean Std. dev. Min Max 
(1) (2) (3) (4) GDP per capita 9.583 .367 8.068 11.038 (GDP per capita)2 91.971 7.024 65.098 121.835 (GDP per capita)3 883.945 101.057 525.232 1344.806 Shapley-Shubik index .090 .041 0 .134 Budgetary period dummy .478 .500 0 1 Border region dummy .249 .433 0 1 Employment 4.567 .919 .331 7.712 Industrial employment 3.286 1.009 -2.765 6.603 Service employment 4.075 .976 .320 7.427 Population density .448 .957 .002 20.381 Observations 2,078 
Notes: Annual GDP per capita growth is measured at PPP where we use logarithmic growth rates between 1993 and 1999 for the  period, and logarithmic growth rates between 1999 and 2006 for the second period. Time-varying covariates as per-capita GDP (PPP), employment measures, etc. refer to initial values, i.e., 1993 for the  period and 1999 for the second period. Total employment, industrial employment, service employment, and per-capita GDP are measured in logarithmic terms. We miss information on the four French overseas-departements and the two autonomous Portuguese regions Madeira and Azores for both periods. In the second period we loose 12 regions that cannot be assigned to the 1994-99 data due to a territorial reform in Saxony-Anhalt. 
Table 3: Estimation of the Generalized Propensity Score (GPS) 
Coef. Std. err. GDP per capita 403.226 55.040 (GDP per capita)2 -42.016 5.787 (GDP per capita)3 1.443 .203 Shapley-Shubik index -4.903 .809 Budgetary period dummy .672 .063 Border region dummy -.054 .067 Employment 1.964 .278 Industrial employment -.957 .107 Service employment -.867 .197 Population density .055 .029 Constant -1,284.350 174.267 Observations 2078 
R2 .561 
Notes: 
, ,  
denote signi at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively. 
23 

========24========

Table 4: Treatment Groups and Covariates 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 GDP per capita -22.942 -9.585 2.803 33.683 (GDP per capita)2 -23.220 -9.339 3.107 33.041 (GDP per capita)3 -23.462 -9.074 3.402 32.348 Shapley-Shubik index -6.211 -3.286 2.932 6.575 Budgetary period dummy 2.384 .103 -1.674 -.810 Border region dummy 3.123 1.333 -1.097 -3.361 Employment -5.649 -2.473 3.316 4.796 Industrial employment -7.915 -3.464 3.463 7.919 Service employment -6.053 -3.353 1.757 7.699 Population density -6.906 -.548 .606 6.850 Observations 520 519 520 519 Median t-value 3.46 
Mean t-value 7.79 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quartiles of total EU transfers per GDP. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported in the table. 
Table 5: Cell size for comparison of treated and control units in the matrix of 10 blocks and 4 groups 
Block Group 1 Control 1 Group 2 Control 2 Group 3 Control 3 Group 4 Control 4 1 40 638 49 398 49 336 31 848 2 42 183 47 155 49 183 31 256 3 41 114 48 113 49 121 32 102 4 40 91 50 105 49 147 32 56 5 41 73 48 99 49 73 30 30 6 40 57 47 98 49 63 32 29 7 41 53 50 49 49 89 32 20 8 41 30 48 74 49 52 31 15 9 41 27 48 67 49 67 31 11 10 40 20 48 52 49 72 31 13 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quartiles of EU transfers per GDP whereas the blocks are generated according to the deciles of the GPS evaluated at the median treatment intensity of each group. 
24 

========25========

Table 6: Balance of Covariates accounting for the GPS 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 
GDP per capita -.474 (GDP per capita)2 -.462 (GDP per capita)3 
-1.989 -1.961 
-1.039 1.006 -1.001 .981 
-.451 -1.932 -.962 .956 Shapley-Shubik index -.017 -.182 .728 -.522 Budgetary period dummy .547 -.530 -.828 .120 Border region dummy .606 -.104 -.283 1.253 Employment .448 -.096 .383 .486 Industrial employment .219 -.099 .774 .687 Service employment .405 -.171 .059 .680 Population density .124 -.317 -.835 .558 Observations 407 483 490 313 
Median t-value .53 Mean t-value .63 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quartiles of total EU transfers per GDP. Observations which do not satisfy the common support condition are excluded from the respective groups. In order to control for the GPS values we discretize them into deciles. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported 
in the table. See main text for details. 
Table 7: Estimation of the Dose-Response Function 
Coef. Std. err. 
ln(Total EU transfers/GDP) .012 .0007 
 
ln(Total EU transfers/GDP)2 ln(Total EU transfers/GDP)3 
.001 .0001 
 .00004 4.61e-06 
 
ln(GPS) .001 .0002 
 
ln(GPS)2 ln(GPS)3 
.0005 .00006 
 .00003 3.89e-06 
 
ln(GPS)*ln(Fund/GDP) 9.00e-06 .00003 Constant .084 .002 
 Observations 1,693 
R2 
.11 
Notes: 
, ,  
denote signi at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively. We estimate the dose-response function by blockwise bootstrapping (i.e., drawing from the regional level and then merging respective periods) with 1,000 
iterations that take into account  estimations. 
25 

========26========

Figure 1: Regional Distribution of EU Transfers 
Note: The maps indicate the annual transfer intensity (total EU transfers per GPD) for the 1994-99 and 2000-06 programming periods. 

========27========

Figure 2: Common Support of the Generalized Propensity Score 
Note: The groups are generated according to the quartiles of total EU transfers per GDP. 

========28========

Figure 3: Observations failing common support restriction 
1994-1999 
Excluded observations 
2000-2006 
Excluded observations 
Note: The maps indicate the region-period observations that are dropped due to their GPS values lying out of the common support region. 

========29========

Figure 4: Effects of Total EU Transfers 
Dose-Response Function Treatment E Function 
Note: Observations with treatment levels in the highest and lowest 5% are trimmed. The dotted bars in the treatment e function indicate the optimal treatment intensity and the maximum desirable treatment intensity, respectively. The functions in the center of each graph are surrounded by their block-bootstrapped 90% con bands. 

========30========

Figure 5: Transfer Multiplier and per-capita GDP gap 
1994-1999 
Multiplier>=1, Gap<=0 
Multiplier>=1, Gap>0 
Multiplier<1, Gap<=0 
Multiplier<1, Gap>0 
2000-2006 
Multiplier>=1, Gap<=0 
Multiplier>=1, Gap>0 
Multiplier<1, Gap<=0 
Multiplier<1, Gap>0 
Note: The regions are assigned to the four groups according to the predicted transfer multiplier and their per-capita GDP gap prior to the respective programming period, i.e. 1993 and 1999. The transfer multiplier is derived using the treatment e function from Figure 4 and the respective treatment intensity. 

========31========

Figure 6: Effects of Objective 1 and Cohesion Fund Transfers 
A. Objective 1 
Dose-Response Function Treatment E Function 
B. Cohesion Fund 
Dose-Response Function Treatment E Function 
Note: Observations with treatment levels in the highest and lowest 5% are trimmed. The dotted bars in the treatment e functions indicate the minimum necessary and the maximum desirable treatment intensities. The functions in the center of each graph are surrounded by their block-bootstrapped 90% con bands. 

========32========

References 
Becker, Sascha O. and Marc-Andreas Muendler, \The e of FDI on job security," 
B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy (Advances), 2008, 8. 
, Peter H. Egger, and Maximilian von Ehrlich, \Going NUTS: the e of EU Structural Funds on regional performance," Journal of Public Economics, 2010, 94, 578{590. 
, , , and Robert Fenge, \Going NUTS: the e of EU Structural Funds on regional performance," CESifo Working Paper No. 2495, November 2008. 
Boldrin, Michele and Fabio Canova, \Europe’s regions - income disparities and re- 
gional policies," Economic Policy, 2001, 32, 207{253. 
Dehejia, Rajeev and Sadek Wahba, \Causal e in nonexperimental studies: 
reevaluating the evaluation of training programs," Journal of the American Statisti- 
cal Association, 1999, 94, 1053{1062. 
European Commission, \ERDF in  1988," Brussels: Commission of the Euro- 
pean Communities 1989. 
, \Regional Policy { Inforegio," http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/policy/ fonds/index_en.htm 2008. 
Felsenthal, Dan and Moshe Machover, \The weighted voting rule in the EU’s council 
of ministers, 1958-95: intentions and outcomes," Electoral Studies, 1998, 16, 33{47. 
Hagen, Tobias and Philipp Mohl, \Which is the right dose of EU cohesion policy for 
economic growth?," ZEW Discussion Paper No. 08-104, December 2008. 
Heckman, James J., Hidehiko Ichimura, and Petra Todd, \Matching as an econo- 
metric evaluation estimator: evidence from evaluating a job training programme," Re- 
view of Economic Studies, 1997, 64, 605{654. 
Hirano, Keisuke and Guido W. Imbens, \The propensity score with continuous 
treatments," in Andrew Gelman and Xiao-Li Meng, eds., Applied Bayesian Modeling 
and Causal Inference from Incomplete-Data Perspectives, Wiley, 2004, chapter 7. 
Hirshleifer, Jack, \On the theory of optimal investment decision," Journal of Political 
Economy, 1958, 66, 329{352. 
Imai, Kosuke and David A. Van Dijk, \Causal inference with general treatment 
regimes: generalizing the propensity score," Journal of the American Statistical Asso- 
ciation, 2004, 99, 854{866. 
32 

========33========

Imbens, Guido W., \The role of the propensity score in estimating dose-response func- 
tions," Biometrika, 2000, 87, 706{710. 
Kluve, Jochen, Hilmar Schneider, Arne Uhlendor and Zhong Zhao, \Evalu- 
ating continuous training programs using the generalized propensity score," Journal of 
the Royal Statistical Society, Series A, 2011. 
Martin, Philippe, \Public policies, regional inequalities and growth," Journal of Public 
Economics, 1999, 73, 85{105. 
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert M. Vishny, \Industrialization 
and the big push," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1989, 106, 503{530. 
Rosenbaum, P.R. and D.B. Rubin, \The central role of the propensity score in ob- 
servational studies for causal e Biometrika, 1983, 70, 41{55. 
Sachs, Je D., John W. McArthur, Guido Schmidt-Traub, Margaret Kruk, 
Chandrika Bahadur, Michael Faye, and Gordon McCord, \Ending Africa’s 
poverty trap," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2004, 2004, 117{216. 
Shapley, Lloyd S. and Martin Shubik, \A method for evaluating the distribution of 
power in a committee system," American Political Science Review, 1954, 48, 787{792. 
Widgren, Mika, \The impact of council voting rules on EU decision-making," CESifo 
Economic Studies, 2009, 55, 30{56. 
33 

========34========

Appendix 
A Infrastructure endowments and environmental 
hazards as additional determinants of treat- 
ment intensity 
There are good reasons to expect the transfer allocation within the EU to depend also on regional infrastructure endowments and on local environmental issues as the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund  many infrastructure and environ- mental projects. We aim at capturing these e by the regional road density and by an index that re environmental hazards in an augmented empirical analysis. The data on road endowments were provided by the O for Regional Science, Planning and Geographical Information (RRG). We include the cumulative length of roads in the respective NUTS3 regions (in kilometers) prior to each programming period, i.e., 1993 and 1999, weighted by the total area (in square kilometers) in addi- tion to the observable covariates in Xi. The environmental hazards index stems from the ESPON regional database where we chose the index capturing all weighted envi- ronmental hazard values. The hazard dimensions include snow avalanches, droughts, earthquakes, extreme temperatures, ods, forest  landslides, the occurrence of storm surges, the tsunami potential, the risk of volcanic eruptions, winter storms and tropical storms, the air tras hazard potential, the risk from chemical plants, the risk of radioactive contamination, and oil spills. 
The infrastructure variable as well as the environmental hazard index turn out to vary signitly across treatment groups which suggests that they indeed a the transfer treatment intensity. Including these variables also raises the explana- tory power of the  regression from an R2 of 56% to one of 58%. After imposing the common support condition and matching on the GPS we are still able to reach a sut balancing of covariates and thereby eliminate the selection bias. While 39 out of 48 t-tests on mean di of covariates indicate signit di across the four treatment groups before matching on the GPS, none of the t-tests remains signit after controlling for the GPS. The average t-statistic drops from 5 to 0.4 after controlling for the GPS.27 Again, we follow the proce- dure as outlined in Section 3.3 for estimating the dose-response function and the treatment e function for the augmented model. Due to missing data on the infrastructure and environmental variables the augmented second-stage regression is based on only 1,332 observations. Yet, despite the considerably smaller sample 
27The corresponding tables are available upon request. 
34 

========35========

with common support, the point estimates as well as the condence intervals of the dose-response as well as the treatment e functions do not change much com- pared to our benchmark estimation (see Figure A1). Provided that the results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to the benchmark results in the main text, we consider the main results preferable since they are based on a substantially larger sample of observations. 
FIGURE A1 ABOUT HERE 
B Sensitivity with respect to the chosen number 
of treatment groups 
In Section 3.2, we assigned the observations to four treatment groups that were generated according to the quartiles of the distribution of EU transfer intensity in terms of regional GDP. In general, there is a trade-o between the coarseness of the classi and the violation of the balancing property. The coarser the classi the more likely will the balancing property be violated (i.e., the less comparable are treated and control units), but the more observations will have common support. On the contrary, the  the classi the less likely will the balancing property be violated, but the less observations will have common support. Our results appear quite robust to the chosen number of treatment groups. 
Choosing a coarser classi than for the benchmark results with three treat- ment groups according to the terciles of the treatment distribution ampli the di in covariates across groups compared to the classi with four treat- ment groups. The average t-statistic in the balancing score tests increases from 7.79 to 9.4 (see Tables 4 and B1). However, conditioning on the GPS still renders the di across treatment groups insignit as is obvious from Table B2. 
Choosing a  classi than for the benchmark results with e treatment groups of approximately the same size reduces the di in covariates across treatment groups as can be seen from comparing Tables 4 and B4. The balancing after controlling for the GPS is sut as none of the t-statistics reported in Table B5 remains signit at 5%. 
The variation of the common support sample with respect to the number of treatment groups is only minor: while the benchmark speci common sup- port sample contains 1,693 observations the speci with three and e treat- ment groups yield common support samples of 1,712 and 1,599 observations, re- spectively. Accordingly, the estimates of the second-stage model which underlies 
35 

========36========

the dose-response function and the treatment e function estimates remain al- most una28 
TABLES B1-B6 ABOUT HERE 
28The corresponding Figures are available upon request. 
36 

========37========

Figure A1: Effects of Total EU Transfers accounting for infrastruc- ture endowments and environmental hazards 
Dose-Response Function Treatment E Function 
Note: Observations with treatment levels in the highest and lowest 5% are trimmed. The functions in the center of each graph are surrounded by their block-bootstrapped 90% con bands. 

========38========

Table B1: Treatment Groups and Covariates (3 Groups) 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 GDP per capita -26.660 -3.986 33.481 (GDP per capita)2 -26.852 -3.643 33.070 (GDP per capita)3 -26.993 -3.296 32.595 Shapley-Shubik index -5.079 -2.166 7.303 Budgetary period dummy 1.226 2.115 -3.346 Border region dummy 3.315 -.054 -3.260 Employment -7.557 2.930 4.555 Industrial employment -9.352 1.913 7.344 Service employment -8.468 1.476 6.929 Population density -6.590 .254 6.328 Observations 693 692 693 Median t-value 4.82 
Mean t-value 9.40 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the terciles of total EU transfers per GDP. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported in the table. 
Table B2: Balance of Covariates accounting for the GPS (3 Groups) 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 GDP per capita -1.390 -.982 .534 (GDP per capita)2 -1.359 -.960 .527 (GDP per capita)3 -1.329 -.938 .520 Shapley-Shubik index 1.229 -.143 -.871 Budgetary period dummy -.470 .319 -.070 Border region dummy .394 -.597 1.195 Employment .224 .794 -.713 Industrial employment .264 .786 -.401 Service employment .046 .711 -.688 Population density .286 -.439 -.291 Observations 578 663 471 Median t-value .57 
Mean t-value .65 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the terciles of total EU transfers per GDP. Observations which do not satisfy the common support condition are excluded from the respective groups. In order to control for the GPS values we discretize them into deciles. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported in the table. See main text for details. 
38 

========39========

Table B3: Cell size for comparison of treated and control units in the matrix of 10 blocks and 3 groups 
Bloc Group 1 Control 1 Group 2 Control 2 Group 3 Control 3 1 57 566 67 262 47 670 2 59 166 66 178 48 263 3 58 108 66 114 47 119 4 58 68 67 109 47 71 5 57 57 66 96 47 46 6 58 66 66 66 47 21 7 58 33 66 53 47 19 8 58 35 67 72 47 13 9 58 19 66 50 47 11 10 57 16 66 49 47 8 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the terciles of EU transfers per GDP whereas the blocks are generated according to the deciles of the GPS evaluated at the median treatment intensity of each group. 
Table B4: Treatment Groups and Covariates (5 Groups) 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 GDP per capita -21.184 -11.046 -3.072 7.816 30.424 (GDP per capita)2 -21.497 -10.874 -2.818 8.010 29.801 (GDP per capita)3 -21.780 -10.682 -2.562 8.185 29.139 Shapley-Shubik index -8.055 .591 -4.645 3.388 8.731 Budgetary period dummy 2.564 -1.396 3.337 -3.268 -1.230 Border region dummy 3.618 .373 1.072 -.831 -4.236 Employment -3.922 -5.476 .793 3.781 4.815 Industrial employment -6.442 -5.373 -.343 3.935 8.272 Service employment -4.079 -6.656 -.026 2.878 7.925 Population density -6.761 -1.425 -.638 2.287 6.528 Observations 415 417 415 415 416 Median t-value 4.16 
Mean t-value 6.97 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quintiles of total EU transfers per GDP. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported in the table. 
39 

========40========

Table B5: Balance of Covariates accounting for the GPS (5 Groups) 
Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 GDP per capita .533 -1.888 -1.598 -.948 .853 (GDP per capita)2 .532 -1.840 -1.594 -.935 .851 (GDP per capita)3 .530 -1.791 -1.590 -.923 .850 Shapley-Shubik index -1.343 1.768 -1.295 .396 -.160 Budgetary period dummy .584 -1.197 .834 -1.094 .402 Border region dummy .732 -.033 -.165 -.003 1.040 Employment 1.290 -.508 -.082 .148 .756 Industrial employment .882 -.105 -.331 .653 .955 Service employment 1.310 -.827 -.049 -.149 1.001 Population density .334 -.441 -1.234 -.402 1.168 Observations 260 349 390 378 221 Median t-value .84 
Mean t-value .82 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quintiles of total EU transfers per GDP. Observations which do not satisfy the common support condition are excluded from the respective groups. In order to control for the GPS values we discretize them into deciles. t-values reported in boldface indicate signi at the 5% level. The median and mean t-values are calculated on the basis of the t-statistics across all groups and covariates as reported in the table. See main text for details. 
Table B6: Cell size for comparison of treated and control units in the matrix of 10 blocks and 5 groups 
Block Grp. 1 Ctrl. 1 Grp 2 Ctrl. 2 Grp 3 Ctrl. 3 Grp 4 Ctrl. 4 Grp 5 Ctrl. 5 1 26 670 35 407 39 377 37 408 23 849 2 27 180 35 162 39 170 39 234 22 199 3 26 117 35 135 39 128 38 167 22 137 4 26 106 35 106 39 100 37 97 21 50 5 26 66 35 80 39 109 38 42 22 49 6 26 79 35 79 39 74 38 61 23 14 7 25 36 35 66 39 83 38 49 22 33 8 27 44 35 73 39 62 38 46 21 17 9 25 20 35 55 39 48 38 73 23 13 10 26 20 34 87 39 58 37 44 22 17 
Notes: The groups are generated according to the quintiles of EU transfers per GDP whereas the blocks are generated according to the deciles of the GPS evaluated at the median treatment intensity of each group. See main text for details. 
40 

========41========

