March2012 
No.80 
Railroads and Micro-regional Growth in Prussia 
Erik Hornung Ifo Institute 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Railroads and Micro-regional Growth in Prussia 
 
Erik Hornung Ifo Institute 
y 
March 1, 2012 
Abstract 
We study the eect of railroad access on urban population growth. Using GIS techniques, we match triennial population data for roughly 1000 cities in nineteenth-century Prussia to georeferenced maps of the German railroad net- work. We  positive short- and long-term e of having a station on urban growth for dit periods during 1840-1871. Causal e of (potentially endogenous) railroad access on city growth are identi using instrumental- variable and  estimation techniques. Our instrument identi ex- ogenous variation in railroad access by constructing straight-line corridors be- tween terminal stations. Counterfactual models using pre-railroad growth yield no evidence in support of the hypothesis that railroads appeared as a conse- quence of a previous growth spurt. 
Keywords: Railroads, Technological Di City Growth, Prussian Economic History 
JEL classi O18, O33, N73 
Comments from Oliver Falck, Guido Schwerdt, Ludger Woessmann and seminar participants at Ifo Munich, are grate- fully acknowledged. Erik Hornung gratefully acknowledges the hospitality provided by CAGE during a research visit at the University of Warwick. This work was  supported by the Pact for Research and Innovation of the Leibniz Association. Laurenz Detsch provided capable research assistance. 
yIfo Institute, Poschingerstr. 5, 81679 Munich, Germany; 
 hornung@ifo.de 
1 

========2========

1 Introduction 
The statement that technological change is one of the driving forces of economic growth 
is beyond dispute. Railroads, as one of the most important innovations of the nineteenth 
century, have been repeatedly discussed to be the technology that shaped growth during 
the Industrial Revolution (Fishlow,  1965 ;  Fogel ,  1962 ;  Rostow ,  1962 ). The e of the 
railroad on aggregate growth has been comparatively calculated using the concept of 
social savings for many countries that were early adopters of railroad technology and 
ranges from 4 to 25 percent of GNP, depending on the country and the period under 
consideration (see  O’Brien ,  1983 ). For Germany, the relationship between railroads and 
economic growth has been primarily analyzed by calculating the investment induced by 
railroad construction and the backward linkages to other industries (Fremdling,  1977 , 
1985).  Pierenkemper and Tilly  ( 2004, p. 63) for example note that the demand for iron 
and coal induced by railroad construction was the engine of the Industrial Revolution in 
Germany. 
In addition to its macroeconomic eect, technology adoption can be crucial in gener- 
ating localized comparative advantages and regional economic growth. Approaches ana- 
lyzing variations of railroad di within one country, have the advantage to exclude 
di in the institutional and cultural frameworks that might be driving the system 
but that are often di to observe in cross-country studies. Another reoccurring theme 
in the literature is the causal direction of the relationship. Recently,  Atack et al.  ( 2010), 
Banerjee et al.  ( 2009), and  Donaldson  ( 2010) attempted to answer the problem raised by 
Fishlow  ( 1965): Did railroads have a substantial impact on economic growth or did they 
appear as a consequence of growth? There is some consensus in the literature that the 
latter is most likely (Hahn,  2005 , p. 26;  Fremdling ,  1983 , p. 122). However, the question 
whether regions grew comparatively faster after they gained access to the railroad has 
not been answered conclusively (Matzerath,  1996 , p. XI). 
This paper analyzes the micro-regional e of railroad access on economic growth 
at the city level within the German state of Prussia. Using an extensive dataset of 
all 978 Prussian cities, we provide evidence that access to this new technology massively 
2 

========3========

in city growth rates { a widely used proxy for regional economic growth. Following 
the notion that \city sizes grow with improvements in technology" (Henderson,  2005 , 
p. 1577), we estimate that cities that adopted railroad technology subsequently increased 
their growth by an annual rate of roughly 1 to 2 percentage points, compared to the 
non-adopting cities. The size of this e remains relatively stable across a range of 
dit periods and speci 
Using a geographic information system (GIS), we geo-reference historical maps of the 
German railroad system as well as the location of all Prussian cities to obtain information 
on railroad di over time. This allows us to test the relationship cross-sectionally, 
as well as in a panel setting. The period under consideration covers the beginning of 
railroad construction in Prussia in 1838 until the main railroad framework was laid out 
during the 1860s. 
To address issues of endogeneity, we employ an instrumental-variable (IV) approach 
and estimate the causal e of railroad access on growth. This IV approach rests on 
the fact that until the 1860s, railroads were built exclusively to connect important cities. 
Since construction costs were high, lines were mostly built in a linear way. Consequently, 
cities located on a direct line between these important cities were able to gain access to 
the railroad by chance, whereas cities whose location deviated from the line could gain 
access only for reasons potentially endogenous to the city’s growth. By using a straight 
line to connect terminal and junction stations, we can construct a variable indicating the 
potential for railroad adoption { being located within a straight-line corridor { that we 
use to instrument actual railroad access. 
This instrument proves to be powerful in cross-sectional as well as in panel estimations 
with  e The instrument exhibits a time dimension because new straight-line 
corridors were established whenever new railroads were built. Both approaches return 
signit positive e of railroad access over a range of dit periods. In additional 
robustness tests, we apply instrumental-variable estimations to dit matched samples 
consisting only of cities similar in terms of geography or in terms of a large set of other 
matching characteristics. 
Above all, the coming of the railroad was a transport revolution.  Landes  ( 1969, p. 154) 
3 

========4========

notes that faster transport meant that labor became more mobile and natural obstacles to 
the movement of the factors of production were eliminated. As cities became connected 
to the growing rail network, new and existing businesses were able to produce at lower 
costs, realizing scale economies. Consequently, new jobs were created or existing ones 
relocated. Therefore, cities connected to the railroad attracted an increasing inw of 
migrants seeking employment opportunities. This led to two kinds of city growth: natural 
population growth caused by increases in fertility and rural-urban migration. 
We can actually test the hypothesis that railroad access created additional jobs in the 
industry in our setting. In an alternative speci we  that the average  
in cities that are connected to the railroad network is larger than in unconnected cities. 
However, we do not  that railroad access a the number of factories located in a 
city. Thus railroads seem to a industrial growth at the intensive margin rather than 
at the extensive margin. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section  2  reviews the related 
literature. Section  3  provides the historical background of railroad network expansion 
and urbanization patterns in Prussia. Section  4  provides insight into the mechanism that 
drives this relationship. Section  5  introduces and describes the data. Section  6  addresses 
endogeneity issues and presents results of the OLS, IV, and  estimations. 
Section  7  concludes. 
2 Related Literature 
An expanding body of literature examines the e of the di of historical innova- 
tions on growth. Studies of the diusion of banking in the United States (Bodenhorn and 
Cuberes,  2010 ), the di of Protestantism in Germany (Cantoni,  2010 ), the di 
of the printing press in Europe (Dittmar,  2011 ), and the di of potato cultivation in 
Europe (Nunn and Qian,  2011 ) use the geographic distribution of an important cultural 
or technological innovation and analyze its e on micro-regional economic growth, 
proxied by urban population growth. 
Similar to our analysis, some papers study the e of the di of network inno- 
4 

========5========

vations on economic growth at the regional level.  Duranton and Turner  ( 2010) analyze 
the e of interstate highways on employment and population growth of US cities us- 
ing historical plans of the interstate highway system and historical railroad maps in an 
instrumental-variable approach. A reduced-form relationship of historical railroad di 
sion returns positive e on long-term city growth. 
Atack et al.  ( 2010)  causal e of gaining railroad access on population density 
and urbanization in the midwestern United States in the 1850s at the county level. In 
a di approach, their binary variable identifying if a county had 
gained railroad access by 1860 explains 58.3 percent of the increase in urbanization during 
the period. However, their IV setting, which employs a so-called `congressional survey’ 
instrument determining if a county is located on a straight line between cities that were 
originally intended to become connected according to congressional surveys, does not 
yield signit results. Furthermore  Atack et al.  ( 2011)  causal e of gaining 
railroad access on the establishment size in manufacturing between 1850 and 1870. 
Gregory and Henneberg  ( 2010) analyze whether gaining a station had an e on 
population growth in England and Wales between 1841 and 1911 at the parish level. 
Although causality cannot be established, they  that gaining access to the railroad 
network early led to faster population growth as compared to gaining access later.  Baner- 
jee et al.  ( 2009) analyze the e of access to railroads on per capita GDP growth across 
Chinese counties in a panel from 1986 to 2003. To establish causality, they instrument 
distance from a railroad by distance from the straight line between important historical 
cities. They  that GDP growth increases by 0.12 percent if a county is 1 percent 
closer to the railroad.  Donaldson  ( 2010) focusses on a trade model, however his empirical 
approach  positive e of railroad access on real income levels in India, using 
district level data and  panel estimations.  Keller and Shiue  ( 2008) study the 
e of institutions and the railroad on market integration using city-level data for e 
countries in Europe, including Germany. They  that pair-wise price gaps diminish 
signitly when two cities establish a railroad connection. 
We are not aware of any work that analyzes micro-regional ects of railroads on 
economic growth for Germany or Prussia. However, in a side note,  Matzerath  ( 1985, 
5 

========6========

p. 139) calculates that the average annual population growth (1849-1858) of nine Prussian 
cites, that were important locations for railroad engines (but not particularly industrial 
cities) was 1.6 percent and thus slightly higher than the average city growth of 1.5 percent. 
3 Patterns of Railroad Expansion and Urbanization 
This section provides relevant historical information and periodization for Prussian rail- 
road network expansion as well as urbanization. 
3.1 The Expansion of the Railroad Network 
At the beginning of the 19th century, Germany had an inadequate transportation network 
as compared to other European countries (Pierenkemper and Tilly,  2004 ). This was noted 
by German economist Friedrich List, who published his thoughts about the bene of a 
national German railroad network in 1833 (List,  1833 ). List’s blueprint for the railroad 
system connected all major cities throughout Germany. The simultaneous founding of 
the Zollverein (German Customs Union) led to increasing trade between the many states 
and  of Germany and thus transport network expansion became desirable (Keller 
and Shiue,  2008 ). 
Because of constitutional restrictions, the Prussian government was not able to raise 
the capital necessary to  a public railroad network. However, Prussia was in- 
trigued by the British example and in 1838, a law was enacted to allow private parties 
to build railroads. That same year, the  railroad, linking the capital of Berlin with 
the residency of Potsdam, was opened. The connection was, like most railroad projects 
until the 1870s, privately owned,  and operated. Since the railroad joint-stock 
companies easily raised capital, the network grew rapidly and by 1845 had overtaken the 
French system in length (Pierenkemper and Tilly,  2004 ). Table  1  shows the expansion of 
the Prussian railroad until 1880. 
The government’s decision, due to the lack of funds, not to directly construct a railroad 
network, but to approve and license private railroad enterprises, meant that railroad 
construction in Prussia had no central plan (Fremdling and Knieps,  1997 , p. 137), but was 
6 

========7========

built according to the expected proy of lines. Consequently, the sparsely populated 
eastern provinces of Prussia remained unconnected until the government started building 
the so-called `Ostbahn’ in 1848. The state then built and operated railroads similar to 
those privately owned (Fremdling and Knieps,  1997 , p. 138). 
Access costs to railroad-knowledge were quite low and the technology could be con- 
sidered to be a `free-lunch’. The greater obstacle to railroad adoption was that it is a 
network technology. Bene from adoption thus increase with the expected size of the 
network (Hall,  2005 ). In the presence of such network externalities, bene from joining 
the network increase with the number of adopters. Technological di usually follows 
an S-shaped curve, and this is also true for network technologies. In the beginning, only 
those agents whose expected bene from adoption are larger than the costs of adoption 
will adopt. With increasing network size, bene increase, making it feasible for a larger 
number of agents to adopt the technology. The di often follows the trickle-down 
pattern observed by  Comin and Hobijn  ( 2004), starting from the from economic leader 
and ending with the laggards. 
Such a pattern can also be observed in a periodization of German railroad network 
expansion following Sombart:1 1. Preliminary stage until 1845 { connection of major 
cities; 2. Construction of a framework until 1860 { uninterrupted connection of most 
important cities through trunk lines; 3. Full system of standard-gauge railroads until 
1880 {  of a coarse network; 4. Ramication until 1913 { railroad supply for 
smaller towns through branch lines. 
3.2 Urban Population Growth 
The process of Prussian urbanization can be similarly subdivided into four phases follow- 
ing  Matzerath  ( 1985): 1. Transitional phase from 1815 to 1840; 2. Start-up phase until 
1871; 3. Actual urbanization phase until World War I; 4. Stabilization phase until the 
end of World War II. Since industrialization and urbanization are closely related, their 
phases are similar, too. The period we are most interested in is the second phase, which 
coincides with the start of the railroad di process. 
1Cited in 
 Henning  ( 1995, p. 162). 
7 

========8========

Interestingly the  period (1815-1840) is characterized by population growth in cities 
and rural areas alike. While the urban population grew from 2.8 to 4 million (43 percent), 
total population grew from 10.3 to 14.9 million (45 percent). Di can be found, 
however, particularly between the east and the west. West Prussian city populations 
grew faster than the rural population, but the reverse was true for the East. Furthermore, 
while rural population growth was mainly due to a birth surplus, urban population growth 
resulted from a net migration gain as well as a birth surplus (Matzerath,  1985 , pp. 76-80). 
The second phase of urbanization (1840-1871) was characterized by an increasing urban 
population growth. While the urban population grew from 4 to 6.7 million (68 percent), 
total population grew from 14.9 to 20.2 million (35 percent).2 West Prussian cities grew 
much more than those in the middle provinces, which grew much more than cities in the 
East. Also, population growth is positively correlated with city size (Matzerath,  1985 , 
pp. 117-123). 
4 How Railroads A City Growth 
There are various channels through which railroads might a growth. None of these 
can be truly tested in our setting. Nevertheless, our proposed mechanism works through 
productivity gains. 
The Industrial Revolution was a period characterized by a series of innovations that 
increased the level of productivity. Railroads in particular decreased overland transporta- 
tion costs and therefore the price of inputs. Furthermore,  Atack et al.  ( 2011) argue that 
railroads increased competition among  because of an increased market size. Conse- 
quently,  attempted to increase productivity through division of labor. As industrial 
productivity increased, wages increased as well, attracting an inw of workers from rural 
areas to urban centers (Malanima,  2010 ). We thus assume that the e of railroads on 
urban population growth can be interpreted as an indirect e railroad access proxies 
for subsequent productivity advances, which lead to urban population growth. 
Job opportunities created by factories in cities with railroad access attracted a massive 
inw of rural workers (Boelcke,  1996 ). In fact, since railroads were usually built so that 
2Calculated within the borders of 1840. 
8 

========9========

they passed a city tangentially, the development of cities itself changed such that they 
grew toward the station. The road leading toward the station usually developed into an 
important commercial street, attracting industry, and working-class quarters were built 
to surround the factories (Matzerath,  1985 , p. 156). 
Railroads also may foster technological di leading to further productivity gains. 
According to  Mokyr  ( 2002, p. 30), the `technology of knowledge transmission’ is important 
to the di of knowledge and technology itself. The railroad can be seen as the 
knowledge di technology during the Industrial Revolution. Since, at that time, 
most knowledge was still transferred through face-to-face contact, reducing transportation 
costs allowed technology to travel more easy. Being connected to the railroad network 
therefore meant access to a network of knowledge exchange, which reduced search and 
information costs, another location advantage, in addition to lower transportation costs 
and agglomeration gains, for  
During the early days of the Prussian railroad, railroads took over the function formerly 
performed by stage coaches { the transport of passengers and mail.  Borchardt  ( 1972) 
thus describes the coming of the railroad as a communication revolution. The increasing 
possibility for knowledge exchange through direct personal contact and the acceleration 
of the mail tra led to all sorts of new possibilities for technological di and 
knowledge spillovers. 
Furthermore, railroad construction was often accompanied by the development of tele- 
graphs lines, which were built along the railroad line and in many cases even incorporated 
into the railroad embankment. Thus, in many cases, railroad adoption also meant adop- 
tion of telegraphy which even further advanced the speed of communication. 
5 The Data 
Generalizing from urban population growth to economic growth has shown to be an 
acceptable approximation in cases where data on income are unavailable (Acemoglu et al., 
2002). In similar vein, the outcome of interest in our empirical setup is urban population 
growth, which serves as a proxy for economic growth. This seems an appropriate choice 
9 

========10========

in the light of the fact that urban centers were the places where most of the innovation, 
as well as human and physical capital, was located and accumulated. 
Comprehensive and systematic population accounts were published by the Prussian 
Statistical O starting in 1816, soon after Prussia’s new borders were established. 
Urban population was counted on a triennial basis. Only places that held city rights in 
the year of the census were included.3 The censuses usually provided separate accounts 
for civilian and military residents.4 These data have been digitized and made available 
by  Matzerath  ( 1985). We corrected some digitization mistakes in the data and added 
missing variables using the original sources. 
In contrast to much of the literature discussed in Section  2 , this city-level dataset does 
not make use of an ad-hoc population threshold, that was recently criticized by  Ploeckl 
(2011). Making use of the legal deion of township, the dataset consists of all Prussian 
cities during the nineteenth century. Consequently, the data also include a set of very 
small cities.5 The average city size in the dataset increases from 3,804 civilian inhabitants 
in 1837, to 4,525 in 1849, to 6,703 in 1871. From these data we calculate the dependent 
variable for the cross-sectional analysis, the annual growth rate of the civilian population 
for the periods between the censuses. 
Our variable of interest indicates whether a city was connected to the railroad in a 
given year. We use GIS-sofware to measure railroad di Using point coordinates 
of the city centers, we create a map of all cities in Prussia. We then overlay the city map 
with annual maps of the German railroad system (see  IEG ,  2010 ) to discover which cities 
had access to the railroad in a given year. The resulting binary variable takes the value 
1 if one or more railroad lines intersect the city in a given year. 
This approach sometimes returns inaccurate results because cities are represented 
only by point coordinates, which do not re their historical dimensions. Thus, it often 
appears as if a city had no railroad access. We correct our data using information on actual 
railroad access from the German handbook of cities (Keyser,  1939-1941 ), which speci 
3After the establishment of the German Reich in 1871, censuses were conducted only in years ending with 0 and 5. 
4Unfortunately, some of the censuses between 1819 and 1837 provide only the civilian population or were not published at all. 
5The dataset encompasses 434 cities below the usual ad-hoc threshold of 2,000 inhabitants in 1837, 364 in 1849, and 266 in 1871. 
10 

========11========

the year in which access was established and indicates the corresponding connection. 
This information is checked and veri with information from  Koniglich Preussisches 
Statistisches Bureau  ( 1883). 
To achieve consistency in the data, we restrict our sample to the 978 cities that held 
city rights in 1849. Cities that lost or gained city rights before or after 1849 are excluded 
from analysis with the dataset.6 This restriction is further motivated by the census of 
1849 (Statistisches Bureau zu Berlin,  1851-1855 ), which is unique in providing a wealth 
of information at the city level. We thus analyze the 1849 cross section in depth. Our 
various control variables7 include access to rivaling infrastructure such as (i) main roads 
and (ii) navigable rivers and ports. Indicators of urbanization include (iii) pre-railroad 
city growth 1831-1837 and the size of the (iv) civilian and (v) military population in 
1849. Indicators of industrial development include (vi) the share of citizens employed in 
factories and (vii) the occurrence of mining activity at the county level. As geographical 
endowments usually are among the major determinants of city growth, we control for (viii) 
the county-level concentration of large landholdings. As shown As shown by  Cinnirella 
and Hornung  ( 2011), the concentration of large landholdings is correlated with soil-quality 
and thus can be viewed as a proxy for geographical endowments and therefore the supply 
of food for urban markets. Further controls include (ix) the age composition and (x) the 
education of the urban population. These controls are aimed at capturing di 
in future population growth as well as the city’s progressiveness. We also calculate and 
control for (xi) the distance to the closest terminal or junction station of railroad lines 
since nearby cities are more likely to become connected to the network. 
The unobserved incorporation of suburbs and smaller municipalities, as well as merg- 
ers between cities, sometimes introduces measurement error in the data and population 
appears to grow erratically in some cases. Our estimates could be biased in cases where 
cities that had access to railroads systematically had higher growth rates because of in- 
corporations. We can control for such (xii) incorporations using the dataset provided 
6The legal de of township results in the omission of a couple of locations. According to 
 Ploeckl  ( 2011), in Saxony, these locations were actually some of the fastest growing during the Industrial Revolution. When looking at the Prussian census data, we  39 towns entering the census during the period 1849-1885 and thus gaining legal city rights. These cities had an average size of 4,915 inhabitants in 1871 and an average annual growth of 3 percent during the period 1871-1885. The Prussian-wide average was 1 percent in this period. 
7See Appendix 
 Appendix A  for more speci de and sources. 
11 

========12========

by  Matzerath  ( 1985), which also indicates whether a city changed dimensions in a given 
period.8 
We provide descriptive summary statistics for the 1848 cross section in Table  2 . Unless 
speci otherwise, all data refer to the base year 1849. Roughly 8 percent of the cities 
in the sample were connected to the railroad, 41 percent had access to a main street, 20 
percent had access to navigable waterways, and 10 percent were located in a county with 
mining activity.9 
Table  3  compares the annual urban population growth rate of the cities that were 
connected to railroads to that of those that were not. We report growth rates for a range 
of periods from 1821 to 1871, thus allowing a comparison of growth rates before and after 
railroad access was gained. In this case, the control group consists of cities that were 
not connected by 1848 (column 1); the treatment group consists of those cities gained 
access during the period 1838 to 1848 (column 2).10 In column 3, we  that there 
was a di in growth rates, albeit a small one, before the railroads were established. 
However, we nd a strong divergence in growth rates between the groups from the period 
1843-1846. 
We also present the growth rates of the cities with a terminal or junction station, which 
will be excluded from our subsequent analysis, so as to present a complete picture. These 
growth rates are separately presented in column 4 of Table  3  and behave very similar to 
those of the treatment group at  but start to be slightly higher, on average, after the 
period 1846-1849. 
6 The Causal E of Railroad Access on City Growth 
As mentioned earlier, the direction of causality between railroad access and urban growth 
is not straightforward. Railroads might induce population growth in connected cities, but 
having access itself might not be independent of a city’s importance, wealth, and growth 
prospects. Thus, there might be an omitted variable that is correlated with both city 
8Unfortunately we sometimes still observe abnormal jumps in the population accounts which is why we exclude obser- vations whose annual population growth exceeds minus or plus 10 percent. 
9The share of factory workers, as well as the school enrollment rate, exceeds 100 percent in some cases, presumably due to workers and schoolchildren commuting from outside of the city. 
10The control group however includes cities that gained access in the period 1849-1871. 
12 

========13========

growth and railroad access. Reverse causality and omitted variable bias could be serious 
issues in this setting. 
To address issues of reverse causality and omitted variables, we take two dit 
econometric approaches to establish causality from railroad access to urban population 
growth: instrumental-variable estimations and  panel regression. At this 
point, we exclude from our sample all cities that are most likely to have gained access to 
the railroad for reasons endogenous to our dependent variable, namely, the terminal and 
junction stations of the railroad network. Since, up until the 1860s, railroads were built 
to connect major cities, terminal stations are located in those cities that were the reason 
for the construction of the line and thus do not qualify for the assumption of random 
assignment.11 
Twenty-one railroad lines were built in Prussia during the period 1838-1848. In Table 
4, we provide information on year of construction and length, as well as passenger and 
freight transport statistics, for each of the lines during the year 1848. For now, we assume 
that all other cities had access to railroad technology simply because they were located 
en route between two major cities. 
6.1 Cross-Sectional Estimates (OLS) 
In a  step, we estimate the e of railroad access on urban growth in a standard 
cross-regional growth regression by ordinary least squares (OLS). By doing so, we can 
draw on a variety of unique city-level control variables provided by the Prussian census 
of 1849. In addition, we can calculate population growth rates between dit censuses 
in order to analyze short- and long term e This results in a model where the urban 
population growth rate PGR12 in a variety of periods (t) is a function of railroad access 
RA in 1848 and other explanatory factors X: 
P GRt 
= 1 + 1RA1848 + X018491 + "1: 
(1) 
We emphasize here that the explanatory factors X include a lagged dependent variable 
11Thirteen (25) of the 20 (60) cities with more than 20,000 (10,000) inhabitants were terminal or junction stations of a railroad line by 1848. 
12The urban population growth rate is de as 
ln(P OPt2)  ln(P OPt1) 
(t2  t1) 
. 
13 

========14========

to account for dynamic aspects of urban growth. Each column of Table  5  reports OLS 
estimates of urban population growth on railroad access for dit periods between 1831 
and 1871. We  that being connected to the railroad in 1848 signicantly increased 
annual population growth by 0.9 percentage points during the period 1849-1871 (column 
2). Comparing all periods across columns 3 to 9, we  that the annual population 
growth generated by railroad access varies between 0.4 and 1.1 percentage points.13 The 
coet increases in the later periods under consideration, which hints at increasing 
long-term e from railroad access. 
Note that the counterfactual speci in column 1, where we regress pre-rail pop- 
ulation growth 1831-1837 on railroad access until 1848, is insignit. This means that 
cities that were connected by 1848 had similar or worse growth patterns before the com- 
ing of the rail compared to those who were not. Thus we  no pre-trend in rail access 
that favored cities with high growth rates.14 
Throughout the speci we control for the increasing number of cities that 
became connected to railroads during the period under consideration with a dummy 
variable. The point estimates of this dummy also hint at signit positive e for 
the later adopters, albeit the coets are comparatively smaller in most cases. 
Interestingly, neither connection to a main street nor, in most cases, to navigable 
waterways has positive e on urban population growth after 1849. Controlling for 
these other modes of transportation also rules out the possibility that railroad lines were 
just built alongside the main trade routes and reinforced their status. As expected, we 
 that the lagged dependent variable pre-railroad city growth and city size in 1849 
signitly determine subsequent growth in many speci 
To separate railroad access from other indicators of industrialization, we control for 
the share of factory workers in the city population and the occurrence of mining activity 
at the county level. Both indicators are signit and positively correlated with urban 
13We exclude all cities that had a terminal or junction station on a railroad line in 1848. Furthermore, some cities drop from the sample as they lose city rights. Additionally, we exclude all cities with incorporations and cities with unrealistically low (-10 percent) or high (+10 percent) growth rates, since these increases might be caused by unobserved incorporations. These exclusions explain the decreasing number of observations over the periods. Point estimates are similar or higher if we do not exclude observations with unrealistic jumps. 
14We  similar results when extending the period to 1821-1837 in all our speci (not shown). For better comparability, we show the period 1831-1837 since some observations are missing for 1821. 
14 

========15========

population growth. Also, cities in counties with a high share of large farms, which proxies 
for the supply of agricultural products to urban markets grow faster than others. The 
dominance of small family farms thus might have retarded urban population growth. 
Interestingly, distance to the next terminal or junction station is often signit with 
a positive sign. This means that increasing the distance to those cities seems to foster 
population growth. From this could be concluded that major railroad cities attracted 
most of the regional migration, leaving less migration to nearby cities. We also test 
for interaction e of streets and rivers with railroad access { both turn out to be 
insignit (not shown). 
6.2 Instrumental-Variable Estimates 
To this point, we have assumed that railroad lines were built to connect major cities 
and that cities located along the way were able to gain access to the railroad network 
by chance. Nevertheless, OLS estimates of the relationship might be biased in cases of 
omitted variables. Thus, we use an instrumental-variable approach to resolve the omitted 
variable concern. Similar to the approaches taken by  Atack et al.  ( 2010) and  Banerjee 
et al.  ( 2009), we predict actual railroad access RA in 1848 with the potential for railroad 
adoption in 1848, being located within a straight-line corridor SLC: 
RA1848 
= 2 + 2SLC1848 + X018492 + "2: 
(2) 
Until the 1860s, Prussian railroads were built to connect major cities. Under the as- 
sumption that lines were exclusively built to establish a fast connection between major 
cities A and B, cities en route had the chance to become connected to the railroad simply 
because they were located on this straight line. Thus, all cities on a straight line between 
A and B were randomly assigned to being able to adopt railroad technology. If only these 
cities gained access, our OLS estimates would be unbiased. In reality, we observe that 
connections sometimes deviate from the straight line. Cities located on such a deviation 
might have gained access for endogenous reasons. 
Our instrument SLC is a dummy that takes the value 1 for all cities located on a 
15 

========16========

straight line between terminal or junction stations and the value 0 for all others. We 
thus use variation in the potential for railroad adoption to instrument actual access. 
The idea behind this instrument is that deviation from the straight line bears additional 
costs.15 
If the railroad actually deviates from the straight line in order to connect a 
city, the additional costs of land acquisition, building tracks and stations, and additional 
operational costs, as well as the extension of travel time between the major cities, would 
be immense.16 On the other hand, deviation from the straight line might reduce costs in 
the event of natural geographical obstacles such as lakes and hills. Column 3 of Table  4 
shows that large shares of the lines were built linearly, implying the high costs of deviation 
from the straight line. 
Using GIS techniques, we connect the terminal and junction cities between which 
railroads were constructed with straight lines. Furthermore, we create a bu around 
these railroad lines.17 
All cities within this corridor could potentially connect to the 
railroad due to the fact that they were accidentally located on a linear line between 
major cities. The instrument takes the value 1 for all observations within the corridor 
while all other observation take the value 0. This means that all cities that had access to 
railroads despite not being located on a straight line are taken as endogenous. 
Obviously, deviation from the straight line did not happen exclusively in order to 
connect a certain city and geography introduces random measurement error into our 
instrument. Rivers are one of the main reasons to deviate from the straight line since 
bridge building was expensive and orthogonality was required. Thus we allow the bu 
to expand the linear line by 1.5 kilometers in each direction.18 In contrast to  Banerjee 
et al.  ( 2009), we do not use the distance to the straight line as an instrument as it might 
be correlated with the distance to a major city. In such a setting, the exclusion restriction 
would be violated if proximity to major cities a growth directly. 
15For example, the connection Cologne-Duisburg-Minden was originally intended to pass through the city of Lunen, which is located close to the straight line. This routing would have bypassed the city of Dortmund, which was to become a major industrial center. It was only the city’s willingness to build the station at its own expense and an additional contribution of 3,000 Thaler that convinced the railroad company to build the costly detour, with extra mileage of roughly 10 km, to connect Dortmund (Ziegler,  1996 , p. 310). 
16The average construction stock for a Prussian mile (7.53 km) of railroad was roughly 350,000 Thalers for lines built until 1848. 
17See Figures 
 1  and  2  for examples. 
18Extending the bu size to 2, 3, or 5 kilometers leads to similar results and will increase the power of the instrument. Note that the average distance is 10.8 km to the next nearby city and 17.4 km to the next nearby city with more than 3,000 inhabitants. 
16 

========17========

Figure  2  provides some helpful examples. The map displays a section of the railroad 
system centering around Berlin. We observe e railroad lines radiating from the Prussian 
capital. The hollow circles mark cities that have a railroad station, while black circled 
cities do not. The hash lines show the actual routing of the railroads, whereas the dark 
tubes show the straight-line corridor.19 
For example, in 1842/43, the connection between Berlin and Stettin (today Szczecin) 
was built to provide Berlin with fast access to the Baltic Sea. The city of Biesenthal 
did not become connected even though it was located only 3 km from the actual line. 
However, it is not located within the corridor either, and is assigned the value 0 for the 
instrument. Interestingly, Biesenthal did not open a station until 1865 after a street was 
built toward the railroad line. On the other hand, it looks like the Berlin-Stettin line takes 
a marked deviation from the straight line in order to connect the city of Greiberg. 
Actually, Greiberg became connected to a dit line only in 1863 and therefore 
the noted deviation seems to be for geographical reasons or because land could not be 
acquired. 
Another, very dit, example is the connection Berlin-Potsdam, which was ex- 
tended to Magdeburg and completed in 1850. This line deviates markedly from the 
straight line in order to connect the cities of Brandenburg, Genthin and Burg. Since 
these cities are not located within the straight-line corridor, the instrument will take the 
value 0, assuming these cities gained access to the railroad for endogenous reasons. 
Another observation that can be made from Figure  2  is that railroads do not exclusively 
follow the established main roads. In many cases, it seems as if railroads took a more 
direct line, linking previously unconnected cities with the network. 
Table  6  reports estimates using the straight-line corridor as an instrument. Panel 
A shows  results of the IV approach. The instrument SLC is signitly 
correlated with actual railroad access. First-stage F-statistics are high and con the 
power of the instrument. Second-stage results, reported in Panel B, show causal e 
of railroad access on urban population growth. We  a signit increase in urban 
population growth due to railroad access of 2.1 percentage points during the period 1849- 
19Black lines mark the routing of main streets. 
17 

========18========

1871. Across all shorter periods under consideration, the e varies between 1.1 and 
2.2 percentage points for a city that had gained access until 1848. Coets estimated 
by IV are approximately twice as large as coets derived from OLS estimations. The 
OLS coets might be biased downward in case of an omitted variable { for example, 
cities with lower growth prospects might have inced routing in order to become 
connected. 
Again, it is reassuring that the counterfactual model for the period 1831-1837 does 
not yield signint results (column 1 of Table  6 ). 
The exclusion restriction would be violated if the instrument had a direct or indirect 
e on the outcome. This would be the case if location in the straight-line corridor 
was associated with urban population growth through a channel other than the railroad; 
for example, if the corridor coincided with historical trade routes that foster growth. 
Since we control for street and waterway access in every speci we eliminate such 
channels. Nevertheless, by estimating the reduced-form relationship of urban growth on 
being located within the straight-line corridor, we  no correlation with pre-railroad 
growth 1831-1837 (column 1 in Panel C of Table  6 ). This suggests that the instrument 
works only through the channel of railroad access and the exclusion restriction does not 
appear to be violated. 
Thus far, we controlled for those cities that became connected to the railroad during 
the periods under consideration by using a single dummy variable. Alternatively, we 
can use dit dummy variables for additional adopters for each period. Results of 
such an approach are presented in Table  7 . Column 1 shows that cities that gained 
access to railroads during any of the periods did not grow signitly faster than other 
cities in the period 1831-1837. On the other hand, in column 2 we  that adopters 
of all periods grew comparatively faster during the period 1849-1871. As columns 3-9 
show, this increase in growth rates often occurred shortly prior to the year of becoming 
connected and increased thereafter. Presumably, this is a preceding e of railroad 
construction work. This result also helps to answer the question if railroads followed or 
induced growth. 
18 

========19========

6.3 Robustness Tests in Dierent Subsamples 
This section presents four dit approaches for ensuring that the treated and untreated 
cities in the sample are as comparable as possible. 
In addition to controlling for the size of a city, we also test whether restricting our 
sample to cities smaller than 3,000 inhabitants in 1837 (before the  railroad was built 
in Prussia) changes the results.20 Cities with fewer than 5,000 inhabitants were considered 
as small by the Prussian administration. Restricting the sample to even smaller cities 
with a population of only 3,000, guarantees that none of these were important enough 
to become connected because of sheer size. Although the instrument loses some of its 
power, Panel A of Table  8  shows that this sample yields results similar to those for the 
full sample.21 Nevertheless, it seems as if these smaller cities needed some time to attract 
immigration and the result for the period 1849-1852 is insignit. 
Furthermore, we  that the introduction of 25 district dummies or the exclusion of 
the sparsely populated eastern provinces22 does not change the results qualitatively (not 
shown). 
To conm our previous results, we also employ matching techniques. By using geo- 
graphical matching, we compare cities that had access to railroads in 1848 directly with 
their two next unconnected neighbors.23 
We repeat the instrumental-variable estimations in this matched sample.24 The ad- 
vantage of such an approach is that nearby cities might be very similar in many aspects, 
reducing the omitted variable bias. Since all cities in the matched sample are located 
close to the railroad, we also exclude remote areas from our regressions. This method- 
ology thus directly estimates the et of having a railroad station compared to merely 
being located in proximity to one. Panel B in Table  8  reports results using the geographi- 
cally matched sample. They con previous results and show that cities with a railroad 
station grow signitly faster than their nearby neighbors. 
20Forty of the cities below 3,000 inhabitants had access to railroads by 1848; 627 did not. 
21Restricting the sample to cities with a population between 1,500 and 5,000 inhabitants, thus excluding a large number of very small and very big cities, yields similar results (not shown). 
22These are the predominantly Polish-speaking provinces of Prussia, Poznan, Pomerania and Silesia. 
23The mean distance is 11.8 km to the  nearby city and 15.2 km to the second nearby city. 
24Unconnected cities that were matched to two or more connected cities are weighted correspondingly. 
19 

========20========

We further expand the matching approach to propensity score matching. The aim of 
propensity score matching is to compare the outcome (population growth) for observa- 
tions (cities) that are as similar as possible and { at best { di only in their assignment 
to the treatment (railroad access). Propensity score matching is particularly useful in 
cases where assignment to the treatment group is not explicitly random. In our case, the 
worry might be that even though cities are located on a straight line between terminal 
or junction stations, they did not gain access just because of this fact. 
To obtain a highly comparable sample, we match treated and untreated observations 
using a set of pre-railroad controls. For this purpose, we exclude all cities that gained ac- 
cess to railroads during the period 1849-1871 from the matching. Since the  Prussian 
railroad was built in 1838, we match cities by (i) their size in 1837, (ii) their population 
growth during the period 1821-1837, and normalized numbers of (iii) merchants in 1819, 
(iv) looms in 1819, (v) Protestants in 1816, (vi) private dwellings in 1821, (vii) commer- 
cial buildings in 1821, and (viii) the insurance value of buildings against  in 1821. The 
matching variables are targeted at matching cities regarding their size and commercial 
development previous to railroad construction. 
Since endogeneity of railroad access could still be an issue, we do not show results 
of the propensity score matching but instead use the instrumental-variable approach on 
the matched and weighted sample. Propensity score matching is done using radius and 
kernel matching techniques. To reduce the inclusion of poor matches, we make use of the 
common support condition. 
Results of the IV estimation in a radius-matched sample are shown in Panel C of 
Table  8 . Radius matching  all untreated observations that are within distance of 
a speci caliper to a treated observation according to the propensity score. We  
a signit positive increase of 1.1 percentage points in annual population growth over 
the entire period. Although point estimates are similar compared to previous samples, 
standard errors are higher and coents become insignit in two subperiods. 
Results of the IV estimation in a sample matched using a nonparametric kernel ap- 
proach are shown in Panel D of Table  8 . Kernel matching compares the outcome of 
treated observations to a weighted average of outcomes of untreated observations. Ob- 
20 

========21========

servations that are more similar receive more weight than others. We  a signit 
positive increase of 1.7 percent in annual population growth over the whole period. Again, 
standard errors are higher and coents become insignit in three subperiods. 
It is reassuring that the counterfactual model for the period 1831-1837 does not yield 
signit results in any speci (column 1 in each panel); rather, the relationship 
seems to be negative in this period. 
6.4 Panel Data Estimates 
In a second approach to estimate the e of railroad access on urban growth, we use 
panel techniques. The advantage of such an approach is the possibility of overcoming 
time-invariant unobserved heterogeneity by including  e For our purpose, we 
can include city  e allowing us to exploit exclusively within-city variation. 
To eliminate concerns of reverse causality, we regress city size, measured as the natural 
logarithm of the total civilian population ln(POP) in city i in year t, on a dummy variable 
indicating railroad access RA in the previous year. 
lnP OPit 
= i + t + 3RAt 
 1 
+ X0it3 + it: 
(3) 
We further include city xed es i as well as time  e t, capturing national 
trends in population growth in our regressions. In such a panel setting, the estimated 
coet of interest 3 returns the additional growth in population levels for cities that 
had access to railroads, compared to those that did not, after gaining access. The covered 
period ranges from 1840, just after the  railroad was built in Prussia, to 1864, just after 
the end of Phase 2 of railroad network expansion { the connection of major cities. Since 
the censuses provide triennial data, we derive a panel consisting of nine repeated cross 
sections. The only information published at this frequency at the city level is population 
counts. Thus, the only available control variables X’ are the military population and a 
dummy that controls for incorporation of municipalities provided by  Matzerath  ( 1985). 
By excluding all cities that had a terminal or junction station, we again try to minimize 
issues of endogeneity. 
21 

========22========

We present panel estimates in Table  9 . The  speci reports estimates in a 
pooled sample, including year  e (column 1). Column 2 introduces city  
e and thus shows the within-city e of railroad access in one year on subsequent 
additional population growth. The dummy variable indicating railroad access switches 
from 0 to 1 when a city becomes connected to the railroad network. The results indicate 
that railroad access additionally increases urban population levels by 4.7 percent over a 
period of three years. At an annual rate of 1.6 percent, this coet is very close in 
magnitude to the ones derived in the cross-sectional settings. Interestingly, the coet 
estimated in the  model is also very close to the pooled sample, indicating 
low levels of unobserved heterogeneity at the city level. 
A third speci in column 3 adds 324 county  e interacted with year 
 e Such a speci captures county-wide shocks during a period that 
a all cities within the same county equally. An obvious example could be the 
discovery of mineral resources that introduces a shock to a county’s economy. Other 
examples include shocks to the food supply or epidemics. Interestingly, the point estimate 
increases in magnitude to the previous speci using only city  e 
Using a dummy that switches from 0 to 1 after gaining access only allows identifying 
changes in growth rates in the subsequent period. To be able to show more long-term 
e of gaining access, we code separate dummies for all periods after adoption. The 
 dummy takes the value 1 in the  period after a city became connected to the 
railroad and switches back to 0 for all periods after adoption. The second dummy takes 
the value 1 only in the second period after a city gained access to the railroad, and so 
forth. This way, we compare cities in the same stage of railroad access to all others. Such 
a model allows us to identify nonlinear trends from railroad access. Column 4 in Table 
9  shows signit positive e of railroad access over all periods. Furthermore, the 
coets increase throughout the periods, indicating a positive nonlinear growth trend. 
In column 5 of Table  9  we further restrict our sample to cities that had less than 3,000 
inhabitants in 1837, before the  railroad was built. By doing so, we aim to exclude 
all major cities that might have been connected to the railroad because of their size and 
importance. We  very similar results in this subsample, again indicating that the 
22 

========23========

estimated e is not driven by the growth of larger cities. 
One drawback of our panel estimation is the lack of time-variant control variables. 
Thus, we are not able to account for trends in, for example, industrialization occurring 
during the period, which might have in both railroad access and city growth. 
Nevertheless, we can address endogeneity issues in the panel setting using the instru- 
mental-variable approach discussed in Section  6.2 . Whenever new lines were built, new 
straight-line corridors were established, providing over-time variation in the instrument. 
Thus we construct straight-line corridors on a triennial basis and use them to generate 
an instrument that carries time variation. 
Results of the stage relationship between potential railroad di and actual 
access are presented in column 6. We  a similar correlation as in the cross-sectional 
setting. The second-stage results are presented in column 7. The estimated coet is 
7.7, meaning that a city that was connected to the railroad subsequently experienced an 
increase in growth of roughly 2.6 percent per year. 
6.5 Causal E on Firm Size and the Number of Firms 
Thus far, we have estimated a reduced-form relationship of railroad access on popula- 
tion growth, without testing the proposed mechanism that access to a railroad increases 
the productivity of  and creates more jobs.  Atack et al.  ( 2011) argue that, in the 
nineteenth-century, access to railroads decreased transportation costs which led to the 
extension of markets and to an increase of competition among  in the US. This, in 
turn, led to an increase in the division of labor and consequently an increase in establish- 
ment size. In an additional approach, we test if railroad access increased  size and 
thus might have caused urban population growth in nineteenth-century Prussia. 
The 1849 census (Statistisches Bureau zu Berlin,  1851-1855 ) includes a factory census 
which allows us to test the e of railroad access on  size at the city level. The 
census reports the number of factories and of workers in 119 dit product categories. 
We calculate the average size of all factories at the city level and use it as an alternative 
dependent variable in the same empirical set-up employed in the previous sections  6.1 
23 

========24========

and  6.2 .25 Since such data is exclusively available for the 1849 cross section, we can only 
estimate level e of railroad access on  size. 
The results of this approach are presented in Table  10 , starting with an OLS estimation 
in column 1. We then proceed to estimate the relationship using the straight-line corridor 
instrumental-variable approach of Section  6.2 . Column 2 shows that  located in a 
city with a railroad station were 73 percent larger than in cities without a station. 
This raises the question if  in cities with railroad access grew bigger or if these 
cities were also able to attract more  Columns 3 and 4 in Table  10  show that this is 
not the case. We  a negative e of railroad access on the number of  This ef- 
fect, though signit in the OLS estimation, is insignit in the instrumental-variable 
approach. This means that railroad access a industry location at the intensive mar- 
gin rather than the extensive margin. 
7 Conclusion 
This paper tests the hypothesis that railroads induced economic growth at the micro- 
regional level. Since data constraints do not allow us to directly analyze whether railroads 
a productivity and thereby growth, our identi estimates the reduced-form 
relationship of railroad access and growth. By using city-level population growth as a 
proxy for economic growth, we add sub-national evidence to the literature, which to 
date was mostly focussed on macroeconomic e Basically, we test whether cities 
that gained access to the new transport technology { railroads { grew faster than others 
analyzing the case of nineteenth-century Prussia. 
We  that railroads had a signit e on urban population growth in the short 
as well as in the long run. Cities that were connected to the railroads as early as 1848 grew 
roughly 1 to 2 percent faster than their unconnected counterparts. Added to an average 
growth rate of 0.9 percent during the period 1849-1871, this e is quite substantial. 
To address basic issues of endogeneity, all our estimates exclude cities that were lo- 
cations of terminal or junction stations of the railroads. This means that the estimated 
25Please note that these regressions do not control for the share of factory workers in the city population. However, if they do, the coet on railroad access 1838-48 is hardly a 
24 

========25========

e cannot to be generalized to all cities. Nevertheless, as we have shown, the excluded 
cities developed even higher growth rates, meaning that our analysis might underestimate 
the e of railroad access on growth. 
We also contribute further evidence in the debate over whether railroads induced 
economic growth or just appeared as a consequence of it. By estimating counterfactual 
models, in a series of dit speci where we regress pre-railroad growth on sub- 
sequent railroad adoption, we  no evidence that railroads appeared as a consequence 
of a previous growth spurt. 
Moreover, results from our panel approach show that it was particularly advantageous 
to become connected to the railroad network at an early stage. The longer a city was 
connected to the network, the higher were its long-term growth rates. 
Finally we are also able to provide evidence that railroads a city growth through 
creating industrial jobs thus attracting an inw of workers and their families. Our results 
show that cities with railroad access hosted much bigger factories than unconnected cities 
(73 percent), triggering population growth through the demand for workers from the 
industrial sector. 
In summary, we conclude that railroads reshaped the economic geography of Prussia 
during the nineteenth century. During that period, previously unimportant cities were 
able to achieve economies of agglomeration that prevail even today, while cities of earlier 
historical importance fell into oblivion. 
25 

========26========

References 
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2002): \Reversal of Fortune: Geography and In- 
stitutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
117, 1231 { 1294. 
Atack, J., F. Bateman, M. Haines, and R. A. Margo (2010): \Did Railroads Induce or Follow 
Economic Growth? Urbanization and Population Growth in the American Midwest, 1850-1860." Social 
Science History, 34, 171 { 197. 
Atack, J., M. R. Haines, and R. A. Margo (2011): \Railroads and the Rise of the Factory: 
Evidence for the United States, 1850-70." in Economic Evolution and Revolution in Historical Time, 
ed. by P. Rhode, J. Rosenbloom, and D. Weiman, Stanford: Stanford University Press, 162 { 179. 
Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, and N. Qian (2009): \On the Road: Access to Transportation Infrastruc- 
ture and Economic Growth in China," mimeo. 
Bodenhorn, H. and D. Cuberes (2010): \Financial Development and City Growth: Evidence from 
Northeastern American Cities, 1790-1870," NBER Working Papers 15997, National Bureau of Eco- 
nomic Research. 
Boelcke, W. A. (1996): \Stadtewachstum und Eisenbahnentwicklung in deutschen Bundesstaaten," 
in Stadt und Verkehr im Industriezeitalter, ed. by H. Matzerath, Koln: Bohlau Verlag, 23{40. 
Borchardt, K. (1972): Die Industrielle Revolution in Deutschland, Munchen: Piper. 
Cantoni, D. (2010): \The Economic E of the Protestant Reformation: Testing the Weber Hypoth- 
esis in the German Lands," Economics Working Papers 1260, Department of Economics and Business, 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra. 
Cinnirella, F. and E. Hornung (2011): \Landownership Concentration and the Expansion of Edu- 
cation," CESifo Working Paper Series 3603, CESifo Group Munich. 
Comin, D. and B. Hobijn (2004): \Cross-country Technology Adoption: Making the Theories Face 
the Facts," Journal of Monetary Economics, 51, 39{83. 
Dittmar, J. E. (2011): \Information Technology and Economic Change: The Impact of The Printing 
Press," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 1133{1172. 
Donaldson, D. (2010): \Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastruc- 
ture," Working Paper 16487, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Duranton, G. and M. A. Turner (2010): \Urban Growth and Transportation," mimeo, University 
of Toronto. 
Eisenbahn-Bureau, T. (1855): Statistische Nachrichten von den Preussischen Eisenbahnen, vol. 1, 
Berlin: Verlag von Ernst & Korn. 
Fishlow, A. (1965): American Railroads and the Transformation of the Antebellum Economy, Cam- 
bridge: Harvard University Press. 
Fogel, R. W. (1962): \A Quantitative Approach to the Study of Railroads in American Economic 
Growth: A Report of Some Preliminary Findings," Journal of Economic History, 22, 163{197. 
Fremdling, R. (1977): \Railroads and German Economic Growth: A Leading Sector Analysis with a 
Comparison to the United States and Great Britain." Journal of Economic History, 37, 583 { 604. 
||| (1983): \Germany," in Railways and the Economic Development of Western Europe, 1830 - 1914, 
ed. by P. O’Brien, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 121{147. 
26 

========27========

||| (1985): Eisenbahnen und deutsches Wirtschaftswachstum 1840-1879: Ein Beitrag zur Entwick- 
lungstheorie und zur Theorie der Infrastruktur, Dortmund: Gesellschaft fur Westfalische Wirtschafts- 
geschichte, 2nd ed. 
Fremdling, R. and G. Knieps (1997): \Competition, Regulation and Nationalization: The Prussian 
Railway System in the Nineteenth Century," in Selected Cliometric Studies on German Economic 
History, ed. by J. Komlos and S. Eddie, Stuttgart: Steiner, 136 { 150. 
Gregory, I. N. and J. M. Henneberg (2010): \The Railways, Urbanization, and Local Demography 
in England and Wales, 1825-1911." Social Science History, 34, 199 { 228. 
Hahn, H.-W. (2005): Die Industrielle Revolution in Deutschland, Munchen: Oldenbourg, 2 ed. 
Hall, B. H. (2005): \Innovation and Di in The Oxford Handbook on Innovation, ed. by J. Fager- 
berg, D. C. Mowery, and R. R. Nelson, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 459{484. 
Henderson, J. V. (2005): \Urbanization and Growth," in Handbook of Economic Growth, ed. by 
P. Aghion and S. Durlauf, Amsterdam: Elsevier, vol. 1B of Handbook of Economic Growth, chap. 24, 
1543{1591. 
Henning, F.-W. (1995): Die Industrialisierung in Deutschland 1800 bis 1914, Paderborn: Verlag Fer- 
dinand Schoningh, 9th ed. 
IEG (2010): \IEG-Maps - Kartenserver am Institut fur Europaische Geschichte Mainz," http://www.ieg- 
maps.uni-mainz.de/, accessed November 2010. 
Keller, W. and C. H. Shiue (2008): \Institutions, Technology, and Trade," NBER Working Papers 
13913, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Keyser, E. (1939-1941): Deutsches Stadtebuch - Handbuch stadtischer Geschichte, Stuttgart: Kohlham- 
mer. 
Koniglich Preussisches Statistisches Bureau (1883): Die historische Entwicklung des Deutschen 
und Deutsch-Oesterreichischen Eisenbahn-Netzes vom Jahre 1838 bis 1881, Berlin: Verlag des 
Koniglichen Statistischen Bureaus. 
Landes, D. S. (1969): The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in 
Western Europe from 1750 to the Present, New York: Cambridge University Press. 
List, F. (1833): Uber ein sachsisches Eisenbahn-System als Grundlage eines allgemeinen deutschen 
Eisenbahn-Systemes, und insbesondere uber die Anlegung einer Eisenbahn von Leipzig nach Dresden, 
Leipzig: A. G. Liebeskind. 
Malanima, P. (2010): \Urbanization," in The Cambridge Economic History of Modern Europe Volume 
1: 1700-1870, ed. by S. Broadberry and K. H. O’Rourke, Cambridge University Press, 235{263. 
Matzerath, H. (1985): Urbanisierung in Preu 1815-1914, Stuttgart.: Kohlhammer/Deutscher 
Gemeindeverlag. 
||| (1996): \Verkehr und Stadtentwicklung. Stand und Moglichkeiten historischer Forschung," in 
Stadt und Verkehr im Industriezeitalter, ed. by H. Matzerath, Koln: Bohlau Verlag, VII{XX. 
Mokyr, J. (2002): The Gifts of Athena: Historical Origins of the Knowledge Economy, Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
Mutzell, A. A. (1823-1825): Neues Topographisch-Statistisch-Geographisches Worterbuch des 
Preussischen Staats, vol. 5 & 6, Halle: Karl August Kummel. 
Nunn, N. and N. Qian (2011): \The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence 
From A Historical Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 593{650. 
27 

========28========

O’Brien, P. (1983): \Transport and Economic Development in Europe 1789-1914," in Railways and the 
Economic Development of Western Europe, 1830 - 1914, ed. by P. O’Brien, New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1{27. 
Pierenkemper, T. and R. Tilly (2004): The German Economy during the Nineteenth Century, New 
York and Oxford: Berghahn Books. 
Ploeckl, F. (2011): \Towns (and Villages); De and Implications in a Historical Setting," 
Economics Series Working Papers 536, University of Oxford, Department of Economics. 
Rostow, W. W. (1962): The Process of Economic Growth, W. W. Norton & Co, 2nd ed. 
Statistisches Bureau zu Berlin (1851-1855): Tabellen und amtliche Nachrichten uber den Preussis- 
chen Staat fur das Jahr 1849, vol. 1-6b, Berlin: Statistisches Bureau zu Berlin. 
Ziegler, D. (1996): Eisenbahnen und Staat im Zeitalter der Industrialisierung: Die Eisenbahnpolitik 
der deutschen Staaten im Vergleich, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag. 
28 

========29========

Figure 1: German-Prussian Railroad Network, 1848. 
29 
Note: Gray area indicates Prussian territory in 1848. Hash lines indicate railroad routings in the German Reich. Tubes indicate the straight-line corridor using a 1.5 km bu Hollow circles indicate cities that had a railroad station by 1848. Black circles indicate cities that did not have access by 1848. Source: Own illustration; see main text for details. 

========30========

Figure 2: Straight-Line Corridors and Actual Railroad Acess Around Berlin. 
30 
Note: Hash lines indicate railroad routings from Berlin to Stettin, Frankfurt (Oder), Magdeburg, and Wittenberge. Black lines indicate main streets. Tubes indicate the straight-line corridor using a 1.5 km bu Hollow circles indicate cities that had a railroad technology by 1848. Black circles indicate cities that did not have access by 1848. Source: Own illustration; see main text for details. 

========31========

Table 1: Prussian Railroad Network Expansion 
State owned Private owned Private owned 
Year State administration State administration Private administration Total 
31 
1838 - - 34.7 34.7 1840 - - 232.2 232.2 1845 70.0 - 1308.6 1378.6 1850 657.8 480.9 2729.9 3868.6 1855 1859.3 510.7 2719.4 5089.4 1860 2550.4 1278.0 3340.9 7169.3 1865 2986.5 1430.2 4237.5 8654.2 1870 3505.7 1820.5 6196.8 11523.0 1875 4390.9 2735.5 9750.7 16877.1 1880 11455.3 3649.5 5243.6 20348.4 
Note: Length of the railroad network in kilometers at the end of the speci year. Source:  Koniglich Preussisches Statistisches Bureau  ( 1883, p. 161) 

========32========

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics 
Variable Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max. N 
32 
Annual city growth 1816-31 0.014 0.010 -0.030 0.052 910 Annual city growth 1831-37 0.014 0.013 -0.043 0.089 898 Annual city growth 1849-71 0.009 0.010 -0.021 0.081 906 Annual city growth 1849-52 0.014 0.016 -0.075 0.095 929 Annual city growth 1852-55 0.004 0.015 -0.063 0.100 924 Annual city growth 1855-58 0.009 0.017 -0.074 0.095 914 Annual city growth 1858-61 0.012 0.014 -0.080 0.097 926 Annual city growth 1861-64 0.012 0.016 -0.039 0.096 924 Annual city growth 1864-67 0.004 0.017 -0.071 0.087 919 Annual city growth 1867-71 0.006 0.016 -0.049 0.090 919 Rail access 1838-48 0.081 0.274 0 1 934 Straight-line corridor = 1 0.032 0.176 0 1 934 Street access = 1 0.411 0.492 0 1 934 Waterway access = 1 0.199 0.400 0 1 934 Civilian population (log) 7.847 0.713 5.568 11.159 934 Military population (log) 2.351 1.999 0 8.684 934 Factory workers (share) 0.040 0.118 0 1.605 934 Mining (county level) 0.103 0.304 0 1 934 Large farming (county level) 0.027 0.025 0 0.213 934 Age composition 0.342 0.037 0.173 0.439 934 School enrolment rate 0.915 0.287 0 3.860 934 Distance to next railroad start 0.771 0.868 0.013 4.714 934 Firm size (log) 1.053 0.911 -2.028 5.220 922 Number of ms (log) 2.624 1.000 0 7.002 924 
Note: Summary statistics for the 1849 cross section. The number of observations decreases when cities drop from the sample because they lose city rights, due to incorporations, or due to cities having implausible growth rates. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========33========

Table 3: Dirences in Growth for Connected and Unconnected Cities 
No railroad Railroad Terminal & Period in 1848 in 1848 Di junction cities 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
33 
1816-31 0.014 0.017 0.003* 0.015 
(0.010) (0.010) (0.007) 1831-37 0.013 0.016 0.003* 0.016 
(0.013) (0.014) (0.011) 1837-40 0.016 0.017 0.002 0.018 
(0.018) (0.019) (0.018) 1840-43 0.014 0.017 0.003* 0.018 
(0.016) (0.014) (0.011) 1843-46 0.013 0.024 0.010*** 0.024 
(0.015) (0.014) (0.014) 1846-49 0.003 0.007 0.004* 0.012 
(0.017) (0.015) (0.017) 1849-52 0.013 0.020 0.006*** 0.025 
(0.016) (0.017) (0.015) 1852-55 0.003 0.012 0.009*** 0.012 
(0.014) (0.021) (0.020) 1855-58 0.009 0.015 0.006** 0.019 
(0.017) (0.015) (0.023) 1858-61 0.012 0.015 0.003* 0.019 
(0.014) (0.016) (0.013) 1861-64 0.011 0.021 0.010*** 0.025 
(0.015) (0.021) (0.020) 1864-67 0.003 0.014 0.012*** 0.021 
(0.017) (0.020) (0.020) 1867-71 0.005 0.014 0.009*** 0.023 
(0.016) (0.018) (0.016) 
Note: Annual population growth rates for connected and unconnected cities. The di between growth rates is calculated using a two-sided test. Annual population growth rates of terminal and junction cities are reported for comparison. Standard deviations in parentheses. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========34========

Table 4: Railroad Lines Built by 1848 
Connection Built in Length in km Share of straight lines Passengers Freight in cwt 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 
34 
Berlin-Stettin 1843 134 81.7% 279,768 1,302,519 Stettin-Posen 1847 205 80.0% 172,234 727,245 Berlin-Frankfurt-Breslau 1843/45 389 79.3% 632,899 1,730,987 Hansdorf-Glogau 1847 72 67.2% 108,697 204,899 Breslau-Schweidnitz-Freiburg 1844 67 80.9% 193,996 1,314,144 Breslau-Myslowitz 1843 198 79.0% 376,910 2,109,013 Brieg-Neisse 1847 44 73.7% 85,533 211,993 Kosel-Oderberg 1846 54 82.8% 76,098 338,726 Berlin-Hamburg 1846 286 83.0% 523,145 1,831,190 Magdeburg-Leipzig 1840 119 77.5% 725,495 2,294,189 Berlin-Potsdam-Magdeburg 1838/46 147 81.3% 739,608 869,727 Magdeburg-Halberstadt-Thale 1843 58 69.9% 320,215 1,627,154 Berlin-Juterbog-Halle 1841/48 232 78.6% 330,024 1,098,306 Halle-Gerstungen 1846 165 62.3% 632,943 1,052,009 Koln-Duisburg-Minden 1846 267 83.0% 1,451,703 3,292,257 Munster-Hamm 1848 35 88.4% 134,990 120,095 Steele-Vohwinkel 1831/47 33 40.1% 116,834 1,190,570 Elberfeld-Dortmund 1848 58 53.5% 553,027 2,023,728 Dusseldorf-Elberfeld 1842 26 60.1% 331,112 1,960,077 Koln-Bonn 1844 29 71.3% 608,937 71,509 Koln-Aachen 1841 86 72.4% 514,430 6,033,504 
Note: Presented data cover the year 1848. Freight is measured in Prussian hundredweights. Source:  Eisenbahn-Bureau  ( 1855) 

========35========

Table 5: Railroad Access and Growth in a Cross Section of Cities 
DepVar: Population growth rate 1831-37 1849-71 1849-52 1852-55 1855-58 1858-61 1861-64 1864-67 1867-71 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
35 
Rail access 1838-48 0.002 0.009*** 0.006*** 0.008*** 0.005*** 0.004** 0.011*** 0.010*** 0.010*** 
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) Later access = 1 0.005*** 0.009** 0.008** 0.002 0.002 0.003* 0.005*** 0.006*** 
(0.001) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.001) Street access = 1 0.001 0.001 -0.000 0.000 -0.001 -0.001 -0.001 0.002 -0.000 
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Waterway access = 1 -0.002* -0.001 0.002* 0.001 0.001 0.001 -0.001 -0.003* -0.004*** 
(0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) Annual city growth 1816-31 -0.071 
(0.045) 
Annual city growth 1831-37 0.084*** 0.086** 0.053 0.076* 0.035 0.116*** 0.091** 0.042 
(0.022) (0.036) (0.040) (0.043) (0.029) (0.033) (0.035) (0.030) Civilian population (log) 0.001 0.000 0.001 0.002* 0.003** 0.001 0.002* 0.001 -0.000 
(0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.002) (0.001) Military population (log) 0.000 0.000 0.000 -0.000 -0.000 0.000 -0.000 0.001** 0.001*** 
(0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) (0.000) Factory workers (share) 0.008** 0.011** 0.010* 0.011*** 0.016** 0.009 0.005 0.015*** 0.015*** 
(0.004) (0.005) (0.006) (0.004) (0.007) (0.007) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) Mining (county level) -0.002 0.007*** 0.006*** 0.009*** 0.011*** 0.000 0.008*** 0.005** 0.005** 
(0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) Large farming (county level) -0.003 0.044*** 0.127*** 0.065** 0.058** 0.054** 0.048** -0.010 0.001 
(0.018) (0.014) (0.028) (0.026) (0.029) (0.021) (0.023) (0.025) (0.022) Age composition 0.056*** 0.014 -0.052** 0.014 0.037* 0.028* -0.016 -0.025 0.047*** 
(0.015) (0.010) (0.021) (0.021) (0.019) (0.016) (0.016) (0.017) (0.017) School enrolment rate -0.002 -0.001 0.001 0.002 -0.001 -0.001 -0.002 -0.003 -0.004 
(0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) Distance to next railroad start -0.001 0.001*** 0.001 0.000 0.002*** 0.001 0.004*** 0.001 -0.000 
(0.001) (0.000) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) (0.001) Constant -0.012 -0.005 0.018 -0.020* -0.030** -0.007 -0.002 -0.003 -0.010 
(0.010) (0.008) (0.014) (0.012) (0.012) (0.010) (0.011) (0.015) (0.014) 
Observations 898 906 929 924 914 926 924 919 919 R-squared 0.04 0.21 0.09 0.10 0.10 0.04 0.13 0.14 0.13 
Note: OLS estimates at the city level for dit periods, using the di of railroad technology in 1848. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========36========

Table 6: Instrumenting Railroad Access with Straight-Line Corridors 
1831-37 1849-71 1849-52 1852-55 1855-58 1858-61 1861-64 1864-67 1867-71 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
Panel A: First stage - Actual railroad access and location within straight-line corridor. 
Straight-line corridor = 1 0.546*** 0.566*** 0.560*** 0.580*** 0.591*** 0.539*** 0.523*** 0.521*** 0.505*** 
(0.094) (0.087) (0.095) (0.090) (0.092) (0.094) (0.097) (0.095) (0.095) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 
Observations 898 906 929 924 914 926 924 919 919 R-squared 0.21 0.28 0.21 0.22 0.23 0.22 0.22 0.24 0.25 
Panel B: Second stage - Population growth rate and actual railroad access. 
36 
Rail access 1838-48 0.002 0.021*** 0.016** 0.017*** 0.019** 0.011** 0.022*** 0.022** 0.021*** 
(0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.008) (0.005) (0.007) (0.009) (0.007) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 
Observations 898 906 929 924 914 926 924 919 919 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 33.48 41.85 34.63 41.12 41.71 32.68 29.23 30.22 28.32 
Panel C: Reduced form - Population growth rate and location within straight-line corridor. 
Straight-line corridor = 1 0.001 0.012*** 0.009*** 0.010*** 0.011** 0.006** 0.011*** 0.011** 0.011*** 
(0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.005) (0.002) (0.004) (0.005) (0.004) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 
Observations 898 906 929 924 914 926 924 919 919 R-squared 0.04 0.20 0.09 0.09 0.10 0.04 0.12 0.13 0.12 
Note: Estimations at the city level for dit periods. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Controls include: additional access dummy, street access dummy, waterway access dummy, annual city growth 1816-1831 (column 1), annual city growth 1831-1837 (columns 2-9), civilian population (log), military population (log), factory workers (share), mining (county level), large farming (county level), age composition, school enrollment rate, distance to next railroad start, and a constant. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========37========

Table 7: Estimations for Later Adopters 
DepVar: Population growth rate 1831-37 1849-71 1849-52 1852-55 1855-58 1858-61 1861-64 1864-67 1867-71 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
37 
Rail access 1838-48 0.001 0.021*** 0.018** 0.019*** 0.021** 0.014** 0.024*** 0.025*** 0.021*** 
(0.006) (0.006) (0.007) (0.006) (0.008) (0.006) (0.007) (0.010) (0.007) Rail access 1849-51 -0.004 0.010*** 0.012** 0.016*** 0.013*** 0.011** 0.012*** 0.013*** 0.006* 
(0.004) (0.003) (0.005) (0.005) (0.004) (0.005) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) Rail access 1852-54 -0.002 0.012*** 0.005 0.004 -0.006 0.002 0.004 0.010* 0.013*** 
(0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.004) Rail access 1855-57 -0.007*** 0.009*** 0.005* 0.008** 0.009* 0.008*** 0.010** 0.011*** 0.007*** 
(0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.003) (0.005) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.002) Rail access 1858-60 -0.002 0.006*** 0.002 0.004 0.017*** 0.001 0.004 0.007* 0.008** 
(0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) Rail access 1861-63 -0.007** 0.004** 0.003 0.001 0.008* 0.009*** 0.004 0.002 0.002 
(0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.003) (0.004) (0.003) (0.004) (0.004) (0.002) Rail access 1864-66 -0.001 0.007*** 0.001 0.005** 0.003 0.005** 0.009*** 0.013*** 0.008** 
(0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.004) (0.004) (0.004) Rail access 1867-70 0.001 0.006*** 0.005 0.002 0.004* 0.004* 0.006** 0.013*** 0.011*** 
(0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.003) (0.002) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes 
Observations 898 906 929 924 914 926 924 919 919 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 30.14 42.21 30.94 37.09 40.50 28.72 26.12 27.65 28.29 
Note: Estimations at the city level for dirent periods. Rail access 1838-48 is instrumented by straight-line corridors. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Controls include: street access dummy, waterway access dummy, annual city growth 1816-1831 (column 1), annual city growth 1831-1837 (columns 2-9), civilian population (log), military population (log), factory workers (share), mining (county level), large farming (county level), age composition, school enrollment rate, distance to next railroad start, and a constant. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========38========

Table 8: Estimations in Constraint Samples 
DepVar: Population growth rate 1831-37 1849-71 1849-52 1852-55 1855-58 1858-61 1861-64 1864-67 1867-71 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) 
Panel A: IV estimates using a sample of cities smaller than 3000 inhabitants in 1837. 
Rail access 1838-48 -0.006 0.012*** 0.011 0.010* 0.010* 0.014** 0.026*** 0.017* 0.013* 
(0.007) (0.004) (0.007) (0.006) (0.006) (0.006) (0.009) (0.010) (0.007) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Observations 632 641 659 657 645 657 655 649 649 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 19.12 24.76 18.28 22.30 26.24 16.41 15.85 15.57 15.19 
Panel B: IV estimates using a sample and weights obtained from geographical matching. 
38 
Rail access 1838-48 -0.000 0.022*** 0.016* 0.017** 0.023** 0.016** 0.029*** 0.013 0.020** 
(0.008) (0.008) (0.009) (0.008) (0.012) (0.007) (0.010) (0.015) (0.009) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Observations 267 267 281 277 271 278 277 271 270 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 19.65 21.77 16.76 20.04 19.94 15.88 14.30 18.20 13.07 
Panel C: IV estimates using a sample and weights obtained from radius propensity score matching on pre-railroad controls. 
Rail access 1838-48 -0.003 0.011** 0.015* 0.013 0.025** 0.023** 0.022* 0.023 0.031** 
(0.011) (0.005) (0.009) (0.012) (0.012) (0.010) (0.013) (0.017) (0.014) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Observations 314 209 331 344 296 273 263 215 193 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 29.44 16.56 51.87 59.12 37.34 26.95 43.98 23.36 25.67 
Panel D: IV estimates using a sample and weights obtained from kernel propensity score matching on pre-railroad controls. 
Rail access 1838-48 -0.001 0.017** 0.016** 0.011 0.021** 0.009 0.022** 0.022 0.023*** 
(0.010) (0.008) (0.008) (0.009) (0.010) (0.007) (0.011) (0.016) (0.009) Controls yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes yes Observations 810 623 803 785 759 724 705 677 619 Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 61.85 76.13 78.04 83.85 83.39 73.87 78.29 72.23 59.92 
Note: Estimations at the city level for dit periods. Rail access 1838-48 is instrumented by straight-line corridors. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Controls include: additional access dummy, street access dummy, waterway access dummy, annual city growth 1816-1831 (column 1), annual city growth 1831-1837 (columns 2-9), civilian population (log), military population (log), factory workers (share), mining (county level), large farming (county level), age composition, school enrollment rate, distance to next railroad start, and a constant. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text, Appendices  Appendix A  and  Appendix B  for data sources and details. 

========39========

Table 9: The Impact of Railroad Access: Panel Estimates 
DepVar: (ln)Population Pooled FE CFE Non-linear 3000 FS SS 
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) 
39 
Railroad access = 1 0.053*** 0.047*** 0.060*** 0.077*** 
(0.013) (0.013) (0.018) (0.024) Potential railroad di 0.498*** 
(0.019) 
Access for 1 period 0.028*** 0.035** 
(0.011) (0.018) 
Access for 2 periods 0.036*** 0.040** 
(0.013) (0.020) 
Access for 3 periods 0.059*** 0.076*** 
(0.019) (0.029) 
Access for 4 periods 0.055** 0.073** 
(0.022) (0.029) 
Access for 5 periods 0.082*** 0.093** 
(0.027) (0.042) 
Access for 6 periods 0.103*** 0.107** 
(0.030) (0.045) 
Access for 7 periods 0.121*** 0.089*** 
(0.033) (0.032) 
Access for 8 periods 0.184*** 0.129*** 
(0.046) (0.044) 
Access for 9 periods 0.103*** 0.099*** 
(0.022) (0.029) 
Year  e Y Y Y Y Y Y Y City xed e N Y Y Y Y Y Y County  year  e N N Y N N N N 
Observations 7,680 7,680 7,680 7,680 5,715 7,680 7,680 R-squared 0.38 0.74 0.38 0.34 0.18 
Number of Cities 862 862 862 862 640 862 862 
Note: Panel estimates at the city-year level 1840-1864. Railroad access indicates if a city had access to the railroad network in a previous year. Column FE introduces county  e column CFE introduces a full set of interactions of county  e with time period  e column Non-linear introduces dummies for periods of access, column 3000 excludes all cities larger than 3,000 inhabitants before 1838. Columns FS and SS indicate  and second-stage estimates, instrumenting actual railroad access with straight-line corridors. Further controls: military population (log) and a dummy for incorporations. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========40========

Table 10: Railroads, Firm Size and the Number of Firms 
DepVar: Firm size (log) Number of  (log) 
OLS IV OLS IV 
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
40 
Rail access 1838-48 0.299*** 0.734*** -0.158** -0.188 
(0.092) (0.271) (0.068) (0.127) Controls yes yes yes yes 
Observations 922 922 924 924 R-squared 0.56 0.59 
Kleibergen-Paap F statistic 31.02 31.02 
Note: Estimations at the city level for dit industries. Column 2 and 4 show second-stage results, instrumenting Rail access 1838-48 by straight-line corridors. Standard errors, clustered at the county level, in parentheses. Controls include: additional access until 1871 dummy, street access dummy, waterway access dummy, annual city growth 1831-1837, civilian population (log), military population (log), mining (county level), large farming (county level), age composition, school enrollment rate, distance to next railroad start, and a constant. Signi *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Source: See main text and Appendix  Appendix A  for data sources and details. 

========41========

Appendix A De and Sources of Control Variables 
(i) Street access: Dummy variable indicating whether a city was connected to a main 
road. Similar to the maps on railroad access, we geo-reference the corresponding map for 
paved and unpaved main roads (Hauptstra) in 1848 and match it with the location of 
Prussian cities. 
(ii) Waterway access: Dummy variable indicating whether a city has at least one cargo 
ship for river navigation or one seagoing vessel in 1849. 
(iii) Annual city growth 1831-37: Measured as the average annual growth of the civilian 
population as counted in the censuses of 1831 and 1837. 
(iv) Civilian population (log): Measured as the natural logarithm of the resident civilian 
population in 1849. 
(v) Military population (log): Measured as the natural logarithm of the military popula- 
tion in 1849. 
(vi) Factory workers (share): Measured as the share of total population employed in 
factories of all kinds in 1849. 
(vii) Mining (county level): Dummy variable indicating whether the city is located in a 
county that has a least one steam engine in mining. 
(viii) Large farming (county level): Measured as the county-level share of land holdings 
larger than 300 Prussian Morgen (roughly 75 hectare) over the total number of land 
holdings in 1849. 
(ix) Age composition: Measured as the share of the population younger than 15 years 
over the total population in 1849. 
(x) School enrollment rate: Measured as the share of children at compulsory school age 
(6-14) that attended school in 1849. 
(xi) Distance to next railroad start: Measured as the linear distance to the closest termi- 
nal or junction station of railroad lines in 100 kilometers in 1848. 
(xii) incorporations: Dummy variable indicating whether a city changed its dimension 
through incorporation of surrounding parishes. 
41 

========42========

Control variable (i) is coded using maps provided by  IEG  ( 2010), variables (ii) and (iv) to 
(viii) are digitized data from the 1849 census (Statistisches Bureau zu Berlin,  1851-1855 ), 
and variables (iii) and (xii) are from data provided by  Matzerath  ( 1985). 
Appendix B De and Sources of Matching 
Variables 
(i) City size 1837: Measured as the natural logarithm of the total number of civilian 
inhabitants in 1837. 
(ii) Annual city growth 1821-37: Measured as the average annual growth of the civilian 
population as counted in the censuses of 1821 and 1837. 
(iii) Merchants: Measured as the share of merchants, hawkers and victual mongers in the 
total population in 1819. 
(iv) Looms: Measured as the number of looms on dit fabrics over the total popula- 
tion in 1819. 
(v) Protestants: Measured as the share of the Protestant population in 1816. 
(vi) Private dwellings: Measure as the number of private dwellings over the total popu- 
lation in 1821. 
(vii) Commercial buildings: Measured as the number of manufactories, mills and ware- 
houses over the total population in 1821. 
(viii) Insurance-value of buildings against e: Measured as the natural logarithm of the 
average value of buildings insured by the local  insurance company (Feuersocietat) in 
1821. 
Matching variables (i) and (ii) are calculated using the data provided by  Matzerath 
(1985), variables (iii) to (viii) are digitized data from the 1816-1821 censuses (Mutzell, 
1823-1825). 
42 

========43========

