March 2012 
                No. 83 
TAX COMPETITION AND INCOME INEQUALITY:  
WHY DID THE WELFARE STATE SURVIVE 
Thomas Plümper - University of Essex Vera E. Troeger- University of Warwick 
WORKING PAPER SERIES 
Centre for Competitive Advantage in the Global Economy 
Department of Economics 

========1========

Tax Competition and Income Inequality 
Why did the Welfare State Survive? 
Thomas Plümpera and Vera E. Troegerb 
a University of Essex 
Department of Government 
Wivenhoe Park 
Colchester CO4 3SQ, UK 
E-Mail: tpluem@essex.ac.uk 
B University of Warwick 
Department of Economics and PAIS 
Coventry CV4 7AL, UK 
E-Mail: V.E.Troeger@warwick.ac.uk 
Summary: 
Contrary to the belief of many, tax competition did not undermine the foundations of the welfare state and did not even abolish the taxation of capital. Instead, tax competition caused governments to shift the tax burden from capital to labor, thereby increasing income inequality in liberal market economies that traditionally redistribute income by relatively high effective capital taxes and relatively low effective labor taxes. In contrast, income inequality did increase little or not at all in social welfare states that dominantly use social security transfers to redistribute income. Governments in social welfare states found it easy to maintain high social expenditures because they increasingly taxed labor, which is relatively immobile, to finance social security transfers. We test the predictions of this theory using a simultaneous equation approach that accounts for the endogeneity of tax policies, fiscal policies, and deficits. 
We also thank Dennis Quinn, Irfan Nooruddin, Robert Franzese, Philipp Rehm, Thomas Scotto, Simon Hix and Wolfgang Müller for helpful comments on this project. 

========2========

Tax Competition and Income Inequality 
Why did the Welfare State Survive? 
1. Introduction 
Tax competition did not change the fabric of social welfare transfers and income inequality in 
OECD countries. The welfare state clearly – and contrary to numerous predictions – survived 
the abolition of capital controls and the economic rise of new industrial power houses in 
China, India, Russia, Brazil and Mexico. In many welfare states, social transfers are higher 
than ever before and where they have declined, they still remain shy off the dire “race to the 
bottom” predictions of early globalization theories. Income inequality has risen in some 
countries, most notably in the UK and the US, but not in others. Again, this contradicts the 
predictions of the early globalization literature that expected larger pressures on continental 
European welfare states than on liberal market economies. 
This article explains these developments. In short, we distinguish between countries that in 
the late 70s dominantly redistributed income via the tax system and countries that dominantly 
redistributed income via social security transfers. Of course, these policies of redistribution 
are not mutually exclusive, but patterns are clear. We will demonstrate that because of tax 
competition, all governments shifted the tax burden onto labor. However, governments in 
continental welfare states managed to keep revenues from labor and capital taxation constant 
or even increased total revenues to maintain the high level of distribution through social 
security transfers. Countries that profit from tax competition, Ireland and Luxembourg even 
increase social welfare transfers and reduce income inequality considerably. Apparently, 
governments in these countries tried to avoid significant cuts into the welfare system and they 
adjusted tax policies to reach these political aims. In contrast, governments in countries that 
dominantly redistribute income via the tax system face higher difficulties in avoiding an 
increase in income inequality. On the one hand, they need to shift tax revenues from capital to 
2 

========3========

labor to avoid large capital outflows, but this cuts deep into their traditional way of 
redistributing income and increases income inequality. Governments would have to 
significantly increase social security transfers, yet while this was acceptable to Ireland and 
Canada, the UK and the US government did not implement this option. Both countries thus 
experienced a much larger increase in income inequality than continental welfare states. 
From a theoretical perspective, our arguments make clear that labor taxes, capital taxes, fiscal 
policies and especially social security transfers and public debt need to be analyzed in 
conjunction. These policies are linked to each other via the public household. Research that 
exclusively focuses on some of these policies, only applies if governments hold all other 
policies constant. But usually they do not. The dire predictions of the early models of tax 
competition did not come true because capital is less mobile than these authors assumed 
(authors 2010), but also because governments have alternative ways to respond to tax 
competition, thereby maintaining relatively low levels of income inequality and high levels of 
redistribution. 
Our theory should be tested in a simultaneous equations framework. This is the only method 
we are aware of that allows us to correctly model the endogeneity of the redistributive 
policies. Not controlling for endogeneity would lead to largely biased estimates and likely to 
wrong inferences. Analyzing the choice of tax policies, welfare policies, government 
spending, and effective income redistribution as well as income inequality in 22 OECD 
countries between 1980 and 2005 simultaneously, we find sufficient support for our theory. 
However, we also use descriptive data where needed to illustrate how our theoretical 
argument is linked to observational processes. 
This paper contributes to various literatures: First, it contrasts with previous explanations of 
the survival of the welfare state. Broadly speaking (and with some simplification) there are 
two plausible theories that also explain the survival of the welfare state: First, Soskice, Hall, 
Iversen and others have argued that contrary to the expectations of early globalization 
scholars, income redistribution and welfare spending is not an inefficient burden to a nation’s 
3 

========4========

competitiveness (Iversen and Soskice 2006; Hall and Soskice 2001). Rather, income 
redistribution and the welfare state lead to subtle changes in the demand for education, in the 
comparative advantage of the country, and in the price for capital. Thus, the welfare state 
survives, because under certain conditions it is more competitive than liberal market 
economies. Thus, capital-intense corporations with a high demand for skilled workers may 
decide to stay in welfare state though they have to pay higher taxes. An alternative, second 
theory has argued that capital competition does not lead to an immediate decline of the 
welfare state because political institutions and most notably veto-players prevent governments 
from fully participating in tax competition (Basinger and Hallerberg 2004; Crepaz and Moser 
2004). As a consequence, the predicted race-to-the-bottom does not take place. 
We argue that though these theories appear convincing, they fail to understand why income 
inequality rose in large liberal market economies countries while at the same time income 
inequality remained stable or even declined in continental welfare states. At the same time, 
these theories also do not explain that effective capital and labor tax rates increased in some 
countries. Thus, these theories offer an explanation for the survival of the welfare state, but 
they are not consistent with the cross section of policy changes in OECD countries – changes 
that guaranteed the welfare states‘ ability to redistribute income. 
And second, we also contribute to the literature on tax competition. While the vast majority of 
the literature assumes that governments have to change capital taxes when facing tax 
competition and some studies analyze the effect of tax competition on capital and labor taxes, 
our analysis is (to our knowledge) the first that governments can respond by changing tax and 
fiscal policies including a rise in deficits. As we have just explained, our theory explains the 
(surprisingly moderate) effect of tax competition on income inequality and redistribution by 
analyzing tax policy reforms, fiscal policy adjustments, and deficits. 
4 

========5========

2. The Evolution of Welfare State Politics: A Brief Review in Five Arguments 
Governments largely influence income inequality. By taxing high income more than low 
income, by taxing savings, by taxing capital income at a higher rate than labor income, 
governments can significantly reduce post-tax income. Likewise, welfare transfers to the poor 
and needy part of the population reduce post-transfer income inequality. The degree to which 
governments use these political instruments depends on income redistribution, on a 
combination of political incentives and institutions, the ideology of the incumbent’s party and 
the power of ‘labor’ (Iversen and Cusack 2000; Birchfeld and Crepaz 1998; Iversen and 
Soskice 2006; Pontusson 2005, Bradley et al. 2003; Allan and Scruggs 2004; Minnich 2003). 
However, the historically entrenched social welfare systems came under pressure immediately 
after governments in OECD countries liberalized capital transfers. According to early 
proponents of what would become known as globalization theory, tax competition and trade 
with low wage countries would lead to a race-to-the-bottom in which the social welfare state 
will erode (Scharpf 1991; Rodrik 1997; Swank 2002, 2006). 
Rise of the Welfare State 
Scholars explain the rise of the welfare state by growing political influence of labor and 
social-democratic parties (Iversen and Cusack 2000) and the increasing demand for high- 
skilled labor. The comparative welfare state literature explains welfare policies by a 
combination of economic incentives for redistribution and institutional factors that shape the 
governments’ response to these incentives (Galasso and Profeta 2002). Incentives for 
redistribution stem from overall efficiency gains of redistribution (Samuelson 1958), 
intertemporal redistributive gains of the majority of voter as the middle aged voters 
(Browning 1975) coalesce with the old voters, or altruism (Hansson and Stuart 1989). These 
incentives are shaped by partisan preferences (Allan and Scruggs 2004, Crepaz 2002, 
Bräuninger 2005), veto-players (Tsebelis and Chang 2004, Ha 2008), and interest-groups 
(Hicks and Swank 1992). 
5 

========6========

Globalization and the Welfare State 
Interestingly, all these standard arguments of social welfare policies assume that incentives 
and political preference aggregation mechanisms operate in isolation from the world 
economy. Neither the government’s incentives nor the political aggregation mechanism is 
influenced by the fact that capital and labor are both mobile and that corporations in welfare 
states need to be able to compete with corporations that do not pay a wage premium for 
welfare transfers. This, however, was exactly the argument of the globalization literature, that 
maintained that capital mobility and trade competition exert a strong negative (Rodrik 1998; 
Rudra 2002; Rudra and Haggard 2001; Swank 2002; Scharpf 1991) or positive (Cameron 
1978; Esping-Anderson 1996; Garrett 1998; Hicks and Swank 1992; Huber and Stephens 
2001) effect on welfare transfers, depending on whether scholars looked dominantly at the 
pressure from global competition or the consecutive demand for social security. Scharpf 
(1997: 23) predicts that “capital is free to move to locations offering the highest rate of return 
(…). As a consequence, the capacity of national governments (…) to tax and to regulate 
domestic capital and business firms is now limited by the fear of capital flight and the 
relocation of production. Hence all national governments (…) are now forced to compete 
against each other in order to attract, or retain, mobile capital and firms.” 
The Survival of the Welfare State 
The existence, causes, and consequences of welfare state retrenchment, a discussion that was 
triggered in the late 1990s by Pierson’s work on the new politics of the welfare state (Pierson 
1996), remained more controversial. Scholars continue to disagree whether welfare state 
retrenchment is a mere reaction to the overshooting of the welfare state, whether it is process 
confined to a limited number of countries in which labor power declined most sharply 
(Pontussen 2005), or a structure-induced process that is either driven by globalization 
(Scharpf 1997) or de-industrialization (Iversen and Cusack 2000). Today, it seems hardly 
controversial to conclude that the welfare state still exists, that redistribution has not declined 
in most albeit in some OECD countries, and that overall levels of disposable income 
6 

========7========

inequality as measured by the Gini-index tend to increase in only a subset of industrialized 
countries though the number of superrich individuals and their wealth tends to rise 
everywhere. Scholars explain this survival by two theories: the persistence of the welfare state 
(Hall and Soskice 2001; Iversen and Soskice 2006) and the limits to tax competition 
(Basinger and Hallerberg 2004). 
Welfare State Persistence 
If the competitiveness of liberal market economies increases relative to the competitiveness of 
coordinated market economies, the exchange between these countries would adjust. The 
liberal countries exchange-rate would appreciate relative to the currency of the coordinated 
market economies. And second, Scharpf overlooks that coordinated market economies offer 
many competitive advantages which are likely to persist despite capital mobility. Hall and 
Soskice (2001) stress the importance of vocational training, low strike activities, access to 
low-interest credit, and so on. Together, these institutions guarantee that coordinated market 
economies in many sectors maintain productivity advantages over liberal market economies. 
These will not erode with capital mobility and thus the welfare state is able to survive simply 
because it offers competitive advantages along with some competitive disadvantages. 
Likewise, Pierson (1996, 1998) argues that the success of the welfare state created 
commitments, expectations, and interests which in turn made significant cuts into the politics 
of redistribution unlikely. Policies and institutions are path-dependent and generate the 
conditions that cause a majority of voters to support redistributive policies. 
Moderation of Tax Competition 
A second argument explains the survival of the welfare state with the limited severity of tax 
competition. For example, Basinger and Hallerberg (2004) argue that tax competition has less 
severe consequences than early models of tax competition – those that predicted a race to the 
bottom in capital taxation – made many believe. These first generation models of tax 
competition argued that tax competition will lead to race to the bottom in capital taxation and 
thus to declining government revenues. These first generation models assumed that capital is 
7 

========8========

perfectly mobile. If governments do not offer competitively low tax rates, capital would 
entirely leave a country. But capital is not perfectly mobile, because regulations, 
infrastructures, and the workforce are not identical across country, and because companies 
need to be close to their markets – to mention just the most obvious arguments. Recent 
theories of tax competition, theories that give up the assumption of fully mobile capital, come 
to conclude that tax competition will not lead to a race to the bottom. Rather, it leaves 
governments the option to accept capital exports and to tax the remaining immobile capital at 
higher levels than before to keep revenues constant (Plümper et al. 2011). Tax competition 
also does not erode revenues from capital taxation because governments are not merely 
maximizing revenues. Rather, they maximize political support and in doing so they are 
constraint by the political preferences of their voters, by veto players, and by unions 
(Hallerberg and Basinger 1998; Basinger and Hallerberg 2004; Hays 2003, 2008; Swank 
2002, 2004, 2006). All these moderate changes to the theory of tax competition will alter its 
predictions. In fact, politically informed models of tax competition predict a moderate 
convergence of tax policies to moderately lower levels of effective capital tax rates across 
open economies as well as a shift from capital to labor taxation (Garrett 1998a, 1998b; Rodrik 
1998; Genschel 2002; Ganghof 2006; Swank 2006; Swank and Steinmo 2002; Steinmo 1994; 
Plümper et al. 2009) – predictions which seem much closer in line with the empirical 
evidence than the predictions of the race to the bottom models. If, however, tax competition 
has less effect on public revenues, governments can still afford to redistribute income.1 The 
1 And indeed, the empirical verdict on this hypothesis is mixed at best: while proponents of the efficiency 
hypothesis typically find support (Garrett 1998a; Rodrik 1998; Swank 2002) others show that the relation 
between tax competition and fiscal policies is insignificant and not robust (Iversen and Cusack 2000; 
Plümper et al. 2005). Clearly, if the empirical literature is correct and tax competition has little influence on 
tax revenues, major fiscal policy adjustments are unlikely to occur. Yet, some scholars still argue that it is 
not the absence of declining revenues but political institutions which prevent governments form cutting 
deep into social security systems (Ha 2008, Swank 2006). Genschel (2002: 266) claims that tax competition 
has had a rather limited effect on social policies because welfare states not only faced tax competition but 
were also confronted with slow growth, sticky budgets, increasing public debt and rising unemployment. In 
others words, theories claim that tax policies were constrained by the governments’ inability to reduce 
spending – and not by governments’ inability to reduce capital tax rates (see also Swank 1998; Ganghof 
2004). Perhaps unsurprisingly, political scientists have recently used the very same political factors to ex- 
plain the survival of the welfare state as they used to explain the survival of capital taxation: veto players, 
partisan preferences, the organization of labor, and so on. For arguments relating to partisan politics and the 
welfare state see Allan and Scruggs (2004), Huber and Stephens (1993) as well as Oatley (1999). Franzese 
8 

========9========

"conventional wisdom" on tax competition, "is too simple and considerably overdrawn" 
(Garrett 1995: 682). 
Discussion 
As a consequence, one could feel tempted to go back to the good old world of welfare state 
research that perceives welfare policies as independent of the global economy. Yet, we 
believe that this reaction would indeed be wrong. Rather, we argue that the limited empirical 
support for theories of tax competition explaining changes in welfare policies was ultimately 
caused by oversimplifying assumptions that did not sufficiently distinguish between different 
politics of redistribution and completely overlooked that tax competition is beneficial to some 
countries and harmful to others. Yet, doom theorists argued that globalization in general and 
tax competition in particular reduces policy autonomy of all governments alike. It does not. If 
Luxembourg wins tax competition because it has the structural advantage of being small, then 
Luxembourg can direct more resources to its welfare state. If, in contrast, Germany and 
France lose tax competition because of their size, then these countries have to adjust either tax 
policies, or fiscal policies, or both. Thus, looking at all countries as if global economic 
processes had roughly the same effect and in addition looking at redistributive policies in 
isolation when in fact tax policy and fiscal policy adjustments are substitutes will not 
necessarily lead to correct conclusions. In what follows we argue that governments choose 
very different adjustment strategies to tax competition and countries experienced different 
trends in income redistribution and income inequality. First, not all governments kept 
effective capital tax rates stable, some reduced these taxes, other countries, most notably Italy, 
increased their effective tax rates. And second, not all countries experienced stable levels of 
income inequality. In fact, income inequality rose in liberal market economies but remained 
relatively stable in coordinated market economies. Both variations cannot be explained easily 
(2002) and Swank (2004) relate public spending to labor market institutions and policy preferences while Birchfeld and Crepaz (1998), Hicks and Swank (1992), as well as Swank (1998, 2002) analyze the effects of institutional settings and constraints on the welfare state in the age of globalization. Iversen (2001) exam- ines the joint effects of trade openness, deindustrialization and party politics on welfare state expansion as well as the impact of wage bargaining patterns and central bank independence (Iversen 1999). 
9 

========10========

by approaches that solely seek to ‘postdict’ the survival of the welfare state. In fact, political 
economists need to develop theories and models that go beyond simple, dichotomous 
categorizations of countries and overgeneralizations of trends. 
3. Theory 
Tax competition between OECD countries emerged in the 1970s and accelerated in the 1980s 
with the US government repeatedly lowering capital tax rates.2 After the US tax reforms of 
1986, which increased the gap between the effective capital tax rates in the OECD world, 
virtually all governments in OECD countries begun to consider tax reforms and fiscal policy 
to respond to the predicted decline in revenues from taxing capital. 
In brief, we argue that virtually all governments shifted the tax burden onto labor, but not all 
governments reduced effective capital tax rates. Alternatives existed. Some countries, large 
and indebted welfare states, even increased the overall capital tax burden to avoid significant 
cuts into the welfare system. Other governments were able to avoid cuts in social security 
transfers by choosing a combination of higher labor and lower capital taxes. Neither of these 
countries experienced a significant increase in income inequality. The welfare state persists 
because moderate changes in tax policies allowed governments to keep the level of social 
security transfers stable. 
Yet, we also argue that countries that dominantly redistribute income via the tax system, 
countries that Hall and Soskice (2001) call ‘liberal market economies’, found it much harder 
to avoid growing income inequality. In principle, governments in these countries could have 
avoided an increase in inequality by reducing capital taxes, increasing labor taxes 
significantly and largely increasing welfare spending. But only Ireland and Luxembourg went 
2 
Genschel (2002), for example, compares tax rates in 1985 to tax rates in 1997 – thus implicitly 
assuming that the US tax reforms triggered tax competition. Looking at the data, however, it seems to 
make more sense to assume that tax competition started earlier. Not also that the when literature refer to 
tax competition, it usually implies tax competition between OECD countries. Tax competition between 
OECD countries and tax havens is older and dates back to the early 1960s. 
10 

========11========

this way. Governments in other liberal economies and most notably in the US and the UK 
rather accepted growing income inequality than developing their social welfare program. We 
discuss the underlying logic of this argument in three steps. First, we argue that with 
incompletely mobile capital, a race to the bottom in capital taxation is very unlikely to emerge 
and governments even have the option to raise effective capital tax rates in order to stabilize 
revenues from capital taxation. In the second step, we discuss the adjustment options 
governments have to the moderate tax competition that emerges when capital is incompletely 
mobile and explain why governments from countries with a different established 
redistribution policy choose different adjustment options. And third, we use this framework to 
derive predictions on the effects of tax competition on income inequality claiming that this 
effect was most pronounced in countries that use tax policies to redistribute welcome and did 
not develop their social welfare system in response to tax competition. 
3.1. Tax Competition with Incomplete Capital Mobility 
We follow the Meltzer-Richards model in assuming that political support of the government 
is influenced by the level of income inequality (see Kenworthy and Pontusson 2005 for a 
broad theoretical and empirical justification). We also assume that voter support depends on 
the level of public good provision and the degree to which governments can tax capital to 
finance these public goods. Without tax competition, governments choose a level of income 
redistribution, which is a function of pre-tax income inequality and the income gap of the 
mean and the median voter, as well as an optimal combination of capital and labor tax rates to 
finance redistribution and public good provision. Thus, political support declines in higher 
labor tax rates and lower redistribution, where ‘higher’ and ‘lower’ are defined by the 
difference to the levels of taxation and redistribution before tax competition is triggered. As 
the Meltzer-Richards model suggests, we are not arguing that voters prefer higher levels of 
redistribution per se. 
Tax competition enter the equation in the standard way: if countries have a relatively high 
effective capital tax rate, they lose a share of their mobile capital base; if they have a 
11 

========12========

relatively low capital tax base, they attract capital from countries with higher effective capital 
tax rates so that their capital base increases. However, tax competition reduces the sum of 
capital tax revenues for all countries – that is the countries losing tax competition lose more 
revenues than the winners of tax competition gain. 
With imperfectly mobile capital, the elasticity with which capital responds to differences in 
tax rates is limited. Important differences in the institutional environment such as education 
and skill levels, wage differences, the wage bargaining structure, as well as environmental and 
labor market regulations also prevent capital from being fully mobile. Yet, the arguably most 
obvious reason for immobility is that many corporations produce non-tradable goods and 
services. As a consequence, business activities of these corporations depend on their presence 
in a specific market. Unless effective tax rates are prohibitively high and reduce demand for 
their goods and services to virtually zero, corporations stay in the market even if the domestic 
effective tax rate is higher than in other countries. 
In the absence of perfectly mobile capital effective capital tax rates will not approach zero in 
equilibrium. Rather, models of tax competition with incompletely mobile capital tax bases 
predict, firstly, that in equilibrium effective capital tax rates remain positive and, secondly, 
that different countries choose different tax systems, that is: tax systems do not converge 
(Plümper et al. 2009). Just like competitions in sports distinguish winners from losers, capital 
competition increases capital imports in some countries and capital exports in others and these 
countries, call them winners and losers of tax competition, chose different strategies to deal 
with the consequences of tax competition. 
Whether a country wins or loses tax competition is largely determined by country size and by 
the government’s ability to finance deficits for a limited time. With tax competition, small is 
competitive. For small countries the tax base effect dominates the tax rate effect: When 
countries reduce the effective capital rate, revenues from taxing the domestic capital stock 
decline. This is the tax rate effect. At the same time, however, the country imports capital 
from countries with higher capital tax rates (or exports less capital to countries with low 
12 

========13========

capital tax rates). The additional capital will be taxed at the reduced tax rate. This is the tax 
base effect. Since small countries can import relatively more capital from larger countries 
than large countries can import from smaller ones, the tax base effect is more likely to 
dominate the tax rate effect when a country is smaller. Thus, if a country is small enough, 
revenues from taxing capital may rise when the government significantly reduces the effective 
capital tax rate because of capital imports. Countries with a relatively large domestic capital 
stock also attract capital inflows when they reduce the effective capital tax rates. However, 
revenues generated from this additional capital are far less likely to compensate for the 
revenue losses caused by the reduction in effective capital tax rates. Ceteris paribus, small 
countries act more aggressively in tax competition because they are much more likely to win 
tax competition and attract capital inflows from abroad.3 
The structural advantages allow small countries to act more aggressively in international tax 
competition and at the same time generate additional degrees of freedom in setting economic 
policies unless governments are constraint by high public debt and deficits. For example, 
small countries can reduce capital taxation, hold effective labor taxation constant and at the 
same time reduce debt as Ireland has done. Alternatively, they can reduce effective labor 
taxation and hold effective capital tax rates constant at low levels while at the same time 
slightly increase social security transfers like Luxemburg has done. 
In addition, economic and political constraints to capital mobility allow governments to 
generate revenue from taxing capital even if other countries offer significantly lower effective 
tax rates.4 Governments can counter the revenue effects of tax competition not only by 
3 This argument mirrors the economic research on asymmetric tax competition (Bucovetsky 1991, Wilson 
1991, Kanbur and Keen 1993, Peralta and van Ypersele 2005). Proponents of this approach argue that a 
symmetric account of tax competition eliminates possible terms of trade effects and a conflict of interest be- 
tween the competing jurisdictions cannot arise. Within the asymmetric tax competition model, the small 
country faces a more elastic tax base and undercuts the tax level of the large country in an asymmetric Nash 
equilibrium. The tax base of the small country will thus be larger than in the closed economy case opening 
the possibility for the small jurisdiction to gain from tax competition. The predictions of asymmetric tax 
competition find ample empirical support. All else equal, larger countries tend to impose higher tax rates on 
mobile capital than small countries (Bucovetsky 1991, Wilson 1991, Kanbur and Keen 1993). 
4 We are aware that factors other than tax rates (such as infrastructure, the provision of skilled labor etc.) in- 
fluence the location decision of capital owners. Yet, these factors have been present before tax competition 
13 

========14========

reducing effective capital tax rates; they can also stabilize revenues by increasing effective 
capital tax. This option is assumed away in traditional models of tax competition with fully 
mobile capital. However, the relative size of the immobile capital stock affects the degree to 
which the government needs to care about tax competition. If a country’s capital stock was 
perfectly immobile, the government could set the capital tax rates as to maximize its political 
support. The larger the share of mobile capital becomes, the more the effective capital tax 
rates implemented by other countries influence the governments optimal tax policy. 
3.2. Determinants of the Adjustment Strategy to Tax Competition 
Assume some countries reduce their effective capital tax rate. If the government does nothing, 
some mobile capital will leave the country and revenues from capital taxation decline. Thus, 
if the government does nothing, deficits will increase. Yet, the government has four pure 
adjustment strategies which can be combined to an optimal adjustment strategy: 
1. With imperfect capital mobility, the first option is to increase effective capital rates to 
the extent that higher taxes compensate revenue losses from capital exports. 
2. Governments can also substitute revenue from capital taxation by increasing other 
taxes and most notably labor taxes.5 
3. Cuts into government consumption, and 
4. a reduction of social transfers bring expenditures in line with declining tax revenues. 
From a simple accounting balance perspective, tax increases and spending cuts are functional 
equivalents. From a political economic perspective, these strategies are not identical. Most 
governments perceive moderate tax reforms to be politically less costly than spending cuts or 
cuts into the social security system. Indeed, in most countries, voters respond strongly to cuts 
5 
started and the US tax reform act of 1986 can be seen as an external shock to the previous equilibrium dis- tribution of capital. 
Since in all OECD countries total tax revenues depend more on taxing labor than on taxing capital, relative- ly moderate increases in the labor tax rate fully compensates sharp decreases in the capital tax rate. Since revenues from labor taxes on average exceed revenues from corporate taxation by at least factor 2 in most OECD countries (Hines 2006: 343), a 2 percentage point increase in effective labor taxation can compen- sate for a 4 percentage point cut in effective capital tax rates if we ignore the effect of tax reforms on de- mand and supply of labor and capital. 
14 

========15========

in social security systems. With virtually everyone benefiting from some form of welfare 
redistribution, governments only reluctantly reduce social security budgets. Yet, when capital 
bases are partly immobile, tax competition does not desiccate revenues from capital taxation. 
As a consequence, spending cuts necessary to balance modest decreases in revenues remain 
fairly limited. If governments use fiscal policy reforms to deal with tax competition, welfare 
state retrenchment could remain fairly moderate. 
By ignoring the decline in capital tax revenues and simply allowing higher deficits, 
governments can significantly delay policy adjustments to tax competition. In doing so, the 
incumbent can prevent an increase in tax rates and still maintain previous levels of 
government spending and social transfers. This is a viable strategy in large countries or in 
countries with a large and popular welfare state where labor taxes already are relatively high. 
Welfare states are very unlikely to win international tax competition which renders radically 
cutting capital taxes unappealing. However, governments need relatively low initial levels of 
public debt to make a deficit strategy both successful and sustainable. 
How governments respond to tax competition with imperfectly mobile capital depends on 
how governments redistribute income. Without reducing the complexity of the real world too 
much, we assume that governments can choose any combination of two ways to redistribute 
income. These options are redistribution via the tax system and redistribution via social 
security transfers. While most countries chose a combination of both options, we claim that 
continental European welfare states redistribute dominantly by social security transfers, while 
Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian countries tend to redistribute more via the tax system. In 
addition, the overall level of redistribution in Anglo-Saxon countries is lower than in 
Continental European and Scandinavian welfare states. As a consequence, Anglo-Saxon 
countries enjoy a larger flexibility. 
For this reason, governments in continental welfare states face higher losses in political 
support when they cut social security transfers. In turn, they have stronger incentives to avoid 
these cuts and are therefore more likely to use tax reforms and deficits to adjust to tax 
15 

========16========

competition. In contrast, liberal market economies and Scandinavian welfare states are less 
inclined to dominantly use tax reforms. This does not imply that continental welfare states 
solely use tax reforms and other countries solely fiscal reforms to adjust to tax competition. 
Quite to the contrary: all governments use a combination of tax reforms, fiscal reforms and 
deficits to respond to tax competition. However, continental welfare states rely comparably 
more on tax policy adjustment and thus increasing labor and capital taxes. It is therefore the 
initial level of social security transfers which determines the political response to tax 
competition. 
Table 1 brings adjustment strategies in relation to countries’ initial conditions. We predict the 
combination of tax and fiscal policies that governments choose in response to tax competition 
with respect to their ex ante position regarding size, capital mobility, social security transfers 
and debt. Our argument suggests that larger countries will maintain relative high capital and 
labor tax rates, higher levels of public debt, and higher social security transfers than smaller 
countries. This is so because larger countries cannot win tax competition against smaller 
countries and therefore need to maintain higher tax rates and possibly higher deficits to 
finance a larger welfare state. The latter point is a mere consequence of the fact that liberal 
winners of tax competition grow fast and do not need a large welfare state (this will later 
become a disadvantage when the global economy drops into crisis). 
Second, countries with a large share of immobile capital (approximated by the share of the 
service industry) respond less to tax competition and maintain a relatively high level of capital 
tax rates. This large service industry also allows governments to implement relatively high 
capital tax rates because competition in these industries will be low and wages high. 
Third, a high initial level of social security transfers coerces governments to increasingly shift 
the burden of the welfare state on labor. Governments in these countries will increase labor 
taxation to maintain this relatively high level of social security transfers. Our theory predicts 
that labor taxes rise, while the governments may hold capital taxes constant or even reduce it, 
thereby shifting the larger part of the financial burden of the welfare state on labor. 
16 

========17========

Fourth, initial high levels of public debt coerce the government to maintain high effective 
capital and labor taxes or even rise these tax rates further, high levels of debt, and (relatively) 
low levels of transfers. 
Fifth, if countries maintain relatively high capital and labor tax rates, they can afford lower 
debt and higher social security transfer. 
In other words, small countries with low initial debt levels are the winners of tax competition. 
Governments in large countries with high initial levels of debt are most likely to have to 
respond by increasing capital and labor tax rates. 
Table 1: Determinants of Policy Adjustment 
outcome capital tax rates labor tax rates Public debt cause 
country size + + .. low capital mobility + + .. initial transfer level − .. 0 + − initial debt 0..+ 0..+ + relative capital tax .. .. − relative labor tax .. .. − + indicates that a ‘cause’ exerts a positive influence on an ‘outcome’ − indicates that the influence is negative 
0 indicates that the influence is close to zero 
.. indicates that the model does not make a prediction 
social security transfers 
.. 
.. 
+ 
− 
+ 
+ 
Additional influences have been identified in the ever growing political economic literature of 
taxation and fiscal policies: Electoral systems influences the number of parties represented in 
parliament and hence the probability of coalition governments. Since coalition governments 
spend significantly more than single party governments (Persson and Tabellini 2000, chapter 
5), the need to raise large revenues is politically more pressing in proportional systems. This 
not only leads to higher effective capital and labor tax rates before tax competition unfolds its 
effects, but also makes incumbents more vulnerable to spending cuts (Hays 2003, 2008). 
These high levels of spending and budget rigidity both provide a crucial obstacle to a 
country’s effective political participation in tax competition. Governments in countries with a 
high initial level of government consumption caused by social security transfers would have 
to reduce spending and transfers much more than liberal market economies to become highly 
17 

========18========

attractive for foreign capital. Yet, welfare state retrenchment is politically more costly if 
demand for public good provision was high in the first place. 
3.3. Tax Competition, Fiscal Policy Adjustment, and Income Inequality 
Tax competition leads to moderate adjustments in the tax system because governments can 
choose an adjustment strategy that minimizes the social consequences. Most countries that 
use the welfare state to redistribute income shift the tax burden towards higher taxes on labor 
(and other more immobile tax sources). Increasingly, capital taxation becomes a relative 
irrelevant source of revenue. Since even governments in countries losing tax competition have 
three options to keep government spending and social transfers stable – higher capital tax 
rates, higher labor tax rates, higher deficits – tax competition does not bring about significant 
fiscal policy adjustments in the vast majority of OECD countries. 
Since tax competition is less severe than race to the bottom models make believe and since 
governments have nuanced adjustments strategies, tax competition has a larger impact on 
taxation than on spending. For this very reason, the social consequences of tax competition 
differ largely. Countries with an initially high level of social security transfers do not 
experience much change in income inequality simply because the economic pressure on 
changing fiscal policies remains moderate. 
Governments in welfare states face much less pressure on tax revenues than early globaliza- 
tion theories predicted. Thus, the survival of the welfare state is no surprise. The optimal ad- 
justment strategy for governments in social welfare states was to raise capital and labor tax ra- 
tes, moderately increase deficit spending, and keep government spending and social transfers 
at least stable. In effect, the impact on redistribution and inequality remains modest. Large 
liberal economies choose a combination of cuts in the already weak social security system and 
higher deficits. At the same time, they shift taxation to labor, which eventually causes a mo- 
derate increase in inequality and a further decline in redistribution. New Zealand and to a 
lesser extent the UK and the US serve as examples for very different strategies. Since initial 
debt was lower in the US and the UK than in New Zealand, tax increases and spending cuts 
18 

========19========

remained more moderate in the former countries. In New Zealand the government had to 
increase labor taxes and reduce social transfers to prevent a severe financial crisis caused by 
rising debts. As a consequence, income inequality rose significantly. 
Our theory further predicts that welfare states respond according to their initial conditions: if 
debt was already high when tax competition kicked in, the increase in labor taxation was sig- 
nificant. When debt was initially low, the increase in labor taxation remained moderate. In 
Scandinavian countries, where government consumption was significantly higher than in any 
other country, governments had a strong incentive to increase effective capital and labor tax 
rates. With capital mobility, governments are likely to use increases in effective labor tax 
rates. However, due to initially very high spending levels a stabilization of tax revenues pro- 
ved to be difficult. Thus, these countries are likely to bring spending closer in line with spen- 
ding in continental European countries. 
Whether policy adjustments exert an influence on income inequality depends on how 
countries redistribute income. In Anglo-Saxon and Scandinavian countries, redistribution 
depends on the tax system. Unless these countries profited from significant capital inflows, 
tax competition had at least a small influence on income inequality. In contribution based 
social welfare states, the redistribution of income depends much more on government 
spending and social transfers. Since the pressure on fiscal policies remained weak, 
governments found it comparably easy to defend the welfare state without having to accept 
raising income inequality. Table 2 summarizes the main predictions for redistribution and 
disposable income inequality. 
Table 2: Impact of Policy Adjustments on Redistribution and Income Inequality 
redistribution 
pre-tax income inequality 
social security transfers as compared to initial level 
change in social security transfers*relative effective capital tax rate 
change in social security transfers*relative 
+ + 
disposable income inequality 
.. 
− 
+ 
− 
− 
+ 
19 

========20========

effective labor tax rate 
+ indicates that a ‘cause’ exerts a positive influence on an ‘outcome’ − indicates that the influence is negative 
0 indicates that the influence is close to zero 
.. indicates that the model does not make a prediction 
4. Data 
Available information allows us to analyze time-series cross-sectional data which covers 22 
OECD countries over up to 26 years (1980-2005, due to random missing data points we 
analyze only 537 out of 572 possible observations). We test for the tax competition effect by 
including the distance (inversed) weighted spatial lag of effective capital tax rates to the right 
hand side of the capital tax equation. We analyze the theoretical prediction of our model by 
including the effect of country size (measured by the natural logarithm of GDP), initial levels 
of social security transfers and debt ratio (in 1975 – well before tax competition started) as 
well as the size of the non-tradable sector (measured as value added of the service industry). 
We control for union density and left government portfolio (see appendix 1 for 
operationalization of variables and data sources). In addition we add an interaction effect 
between the domestic capital tax rate and union density as well as left cabinet portfolio to the 
right hand side of the labor tax equation. In the second stage, we estimate the effect of the 
difference between country i’s effective capital tax rate and the weighted mean of j’s 
(instrumentalized) capital tax rates on fiscal policy (debt ratio and social security transfers). 
According to our argument, countries could abstain from cutting social security transfer if 
they allowed for higher capital tax rates than other countries. Governments also need to 
maintain higher tax rates if initial debt rates were high and need to be reduced. Again, we 
examine the impact of initial levels of social security transfers and debt. In addition we con- 
trol for trade openness (exports + imports / GDP) which is also capturing country size6, EMU 
6 
We do not add the log of GDP to the right had side of the second stage since it is a highly collinear to the trade measure and would thus decrease efficiency. In addition using different specification in the various equations of the simultaneous equation model allows better identification of effects because of overidentification. 
20 

========21========

membership, partisanship of the government, union density and the electoral system. We also 
analyze how pressures on the social welfare state such as unemployment and the share of 
people aged over 65 affect fiscal strategies. In the final third stage we estimate the joint effect 
of tax and fiscal policies (especially changes in social security transfers as compared to initial 
levels in 1975) on income redistribution and income inequality. We also test the impact of 
actual fiscal adjustment strategies (changes in the debt ratio as compared to initial levels) as 
well as the electoral system, unemployment and the share of elderly people. We do not 
account for unit fixed effects7 since we include the initial conditions for all countries as well 
as an EMU dummy which are time invariant and capture most of the initial variation. 
Thus, with one exception, the specification of the empirical model is standard and so are the 
data sources we use. The exception is the distinction between countries that dominantly 
redistribute income via the tax system and countries that dominantly redistribute income via 
social security transfers. We briefly describe these categories here, but note that we use 
continuous variables in the data analysis. In 1980, the first group consists of the Australia, 
Canada, Japan, United States, United Kingdom, and Luxembourg, while the second group 
consists of continental European and Scandinavian welfare states. Switzerland and Portugal 
do neither redistribute much welfare via transfers nor via the tax systems. Figure 1 indicates 
the difference between both groups. “Tax gap” indicates the difference between the effective 
labor tax rate and the effective capital tax rate. Sweden, for example, has almost 40 percent 
higher effective labor tax rates than capital tax rates – indicating that labor finances the 
Swedish welfare state. Note that we would obtain roughly the same pattern if we replaced 
social security transfers by the sum of social security transfers and government consumption. 
7 See Plümper and Troeger 2005, 2007, 2011 for a discussion of the pros and cons of fixed effects. 
21 

========22========

Figure 1: Redistribution in two Dimensions, Average 1975-1980 
40 
30 
SWE 
FIN 
20 
SPA 
NOR 
ITA DEN 
AUT 
NDL 
10 
GRE 
POR 
IRE 
SWZ 
NZL 
FRA 
p 
a 
0 
GER 
G 
 
x 
a 
T 
-10 
JAP 
AUS 
GBR 
BEL 
-20 
CAN USA 
LUX 
-30 
-40 
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 
Social Security Transfers 
If early globalization theories were correct, countries should move to the left (they should cut 
social security transfers) and up (the gap between effective labor and capital tax rates should 
increase). 
Figure 2 shows the same relation between redistribution by social security transfers and 
redistribution by taxation. It shows that the two worlds of redistribution have converged, 
because the level of social security transfers became more similar and the redistribution by the 
tax system has all but vanished. Yet, social security transfers have converged to middle levels. 
No country maintained either very low or very high levels of social security transfers. 
However, we find evidence for the tax competition hypothesis that redistribution via the tax 
system disappears since the advent of tax competition. 
22 

========23========

Figure 2: Redistribution in Two Dimensions, Average 2000-2004 
40 
30 
GERFINAUT ITA 
DEN 
20 
IRE 
10 
NZL 
p 
a 
0 
SWE 
NOR 
NDL SPA 
FRA GRE 
BEL 
G 
 
CANSWZ 
JAP 
x 
a 
T 
-10 
USA AUS 
GBR 
POR 
-20 
-30 
LUX 
-40 
6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 
Social Security Transfers 
The increase in transfers in countries that previously dominantly redistributed income via the 
tax system, led to a situation in which many countries crossed the arbitrary border between 
countries with different redistribution mechanism. Nowadays, most countries have a moderate 
to high level of social welfare transfers while very few countries redistribute income via the 
tax system. Thus, capital owners and companies have stopped to contribute to income 
redistribution and this – as we have argued before – is the consequence of tax competition. 
Only countries like Luxembourg that taxes imported capital can afford to redistribute via the 
tax system – a clear indication of Luxembourg being a winner of tax competition. 
Figure 3 displays the changes between 1980 and 2004 and though this figure is redundant, it 
highlights the vast differences between countries that adjusted moderately and countries that 
adjusted significantly. Figure 3 reveals that with the notable exception of the Netherlands, no 
country significantly reduced social security transfers, and many countries even increasing 
transfers. The figure also demonstrates that only Germany adjusted policies according to the 
predictions of the early globalization literature: by shifting taxation towards labor and by 
reducing social security transfers. Yet, Germany is an outlier. 
23 

========24========

Figure 3: Changes in social Security Transfers and the Tax Gap 
40 
GER 
30 
20 
CAN 
10 
p 
a 
0 
G 
 
NDL 
x 
NZL 
a 
-10 
SWZ 
AUTBEL USAITA 
JAPDEN IRE 
AUSFIN FRA 
GBRNOR 
LUX 
SPA 
T 
GRE 
SWE 
-20 
POR 
-30 
-40 
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 
Social Security Transfers 
5. Research Design 
Our theory suggests three important specification decisions: First, the estimation of tax 
competition, second, the treatment of the endogeneity of policy variables, and third the 
specification of dynamics and initial conditions. We briefly discuss each specification 
decision in turn. 
Spatial Econometrics 
Franzese and Hays (2007) have argued that early globalization research remains 
unsatisfactory inasmuch as it models tax competition in a simple linear-additive fashion based 
on Quinn’s (1997) measure of ‘capital account openness’, because capital account openness 
may be a necessary condition for tax competition, but it is definitely not a sufficient 
condition. For example, capital account openness does not account for the fact that economic 
pressure on capital tax rates are a function of the difference of the tax rates in the country of 
interest and comparable countries. We therefore follow recent practice (Hallerberg and 
Basinger 1998, Franzese and Hays 2007, Swank 2006 and Plümper et al. 2009) in specifying 
tax competition as the dependence of tax policy in country i on tax policies in all other 
countries -i≠i. Tax competition is thus modeled as a classic textbook example of endogeneity: 
24 

========25========

Tax policy in country i depends on tax policy in countries –i and vice versa. We weight the 
spatial capital tax lag with inverse distance in order to account for transaction costs of 
physically moving capital.8 
Simultaneous Equations 
As the theoretical discussion reveals, the effect of globalization and market integration on 
taxation, social security transfers and redistribution cannot be examined independently. When 
estimating these effects we are faced with different kinds of co-determination, simultaneity 
and endogeneity. Governments decide simultaneously about revenue and expenditure and the- 
refore about tax rates, transfers and public good provision. Yet, taxation is not only contingent 
on domestic factors but also on decisions of policy makers in other countries. To solve these 
problems and avoid biased estimation results we employ a simultaneous equation approach, 
which allows tackling the problem of endogeneity in policy decisions. We use an instrumental 
variable approach to overcome the endogeneity of the spatial capital tax lag and account for 
the multi-stage nature where redistribution and income inequality depend on decisions about 
taxation and social spending. We thus estimate six simultaneous equations for effective 
capital taxation, effective labor tax rates, the debt ratio, social security transfers, relative 
redistribution and inequality of disposable income (see appendix 1 for the full specification of 
the simultaneous equation model).9 We opt for full system estimation (3SLS) since we 
assume co-varying error processes across equations and thus 3SLS produces more efficient 
results. Yet, we are aware of the drawbacks of full system estimation in case one of our 
equations is miss-specified and therefore conduct single equation 2SLS estimation to check 
the robustness of our results.10 For the purpose of our study, we maintain that domestic consti- 
8 
See Plümper and Neumayer (2010) and Neumayer and Plümper (2012) for a discussion of specification 
issues in modelling spatial dependence. For a discussion of different weighting matrices see Troeger (2009). 9 Identification of the system of equations and exclusion restrictions are discussed in appendix 2. 
10 The estimation results are displayed in appendix 3 and show only very minor changes to the point estimates 
and standard errors which do not change the substantive findings. We also employ other robustness checks 
such as including a time trend, estimating a model with more parameter restrictions and first order auto- 
regressive processes. None of these alterations change the substantive effects which we discuss here. 
25 

========26========

tutional and institutional factors as well as country size are exogenous and therefore provide 
good instruments for the endogeneous effective capital tax rate. (Franzese and Hays 2007). 
Heterogeneity and Dynamics 
We allow the error term to follow a first order autoregressive process (Plümper et al. 2005), 
which allows for an appropriate estimate of the short-term adjustment processes our theory 
predicts as well as controlling for serial correlation. Alternatively we include a time trend into 
the model since existent serial correlation is most probably caused by trends in taxation and 
government spending.11 We do not account for unit fixed effects12 since we are interested in 
the effects of the initial conditions. We also include a time-invariant European Monetary 
Union dummy. These variables capture most of the initial between-variation. Thus, results do 
not change significantly when we replace these variables by unit dummies. However, we 
would lose the ability to analyze the theoretically relevant impact of initial conditions on 
policy adjustment strategies. 
6. Results 
We present the results of a single ivse model in three levels: the first stage estimates tax poli- 
cies, were effective capital taxation of country i depends, inter alia, on a distance weighted 
average of capital taxation in other countries whereas labor taxation is partially determined by 
domestic decisions on capital tax rates. This captures the notion that tax competition has a tax 
system effect, e.g. governments shift at least parts of the tax burden on capital towards labor 
which is less mobile and therefore reacts less elastic to taxation. Note that the reported 
endogeneity and overidentification tests conclude that the simultaneous equation model 
overall is appropriately specified and identified. 
To maintain readability, we discuss all technical details of the model specification in appendix 
1 and 2, which provide a justification of our estimation and identification strategies. We 
discuss each of the three stages in turn (tables 2, 3 and 4) for better understanding. Note 
11 
See appendix for results with first order autoregressive process and trend – estimation results remain 
virtually unchanged. 
12 See Plümper and Troeger 2007, 2011 for a methodological discussion of the pros and cons of fixed effects. 
26 

========27========

though that the models presented in tables 2, 3 and 4 are the results of a single simultaneous 
equation estimation with 6 interrelated equations. 
Table 2: First Stage: Tax Competition 
VARIABLES 
spatial capital tax lag weighted by inverse distance (prediction) / 
effective capital tax rate (labor tax equation) total GDP in current US$, natural logarithm 
Social Security Transfers as percentage of GDP in 1975 
debt ratio in 1975 
value added of service sector as percentage of GDP 
Union density (OECD) 
left cabinet portfolio as percentage of all cabinet seats 
IA effect between capital tax rate and left 
IA effect between capital tax rate and union density 
legal capital mobility (Quinn) 
Constant 
Observations R-squared 
average effective capital tax rate 
270.536** 
(49.373) 
3.923** 
(0.414) 
-0.894** 
(0.131) 
0.020 
(0.015) 
0.283** 
(0.094) 
0.049+ 
(0.026) 
average effective labor tax rate 
-1.202** 
(0.147) 
1.482** 
(0.322) 
0.609** 
(0.071) 
0.010 
(0.010) 
0.720** 
(0.058) 
-0.232** 
(0.068) 
-0.020 
(0.022) 
0.001* 
(0.001) 
0.019** 
(0.003) 
DWH Chi_sqr Test: Endogeneity of instrumented RHS variables 
Prob > Chi_sqr 
Anderson IV Relevance: LR Statistic Prob > Chi_sqr 
0.437 (0.795) -91.392** (10.535) 
537 
0.30 1.339 0.247 1596.00 0.000 
-33.757** (7.290) 
537 
0.54 1.092 0.296 11.67 0.000 
Standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1, grey shaded cells indicate endogenous, 
instrumented right-hand-side variables 
Table 2 presents the estimation results of the first stage where we analyze the effect of tax 
competition on effective domestic capital and labor tax rates. We find that a country’s 
effective capital tax rate decreases, if other countries, especially closer ones, reduce their 
capital tax rate (tax competition effect). When effective capital tax rates decline, labor 
taxation goes up (tax system effect). However, the burden shift remains moderate if union 
density is high. Figure 4 displays the interaction effect between domestic effective capital tax 
rates and union density. Strong unions clearly weaken the burden shift from capital to labor 
taxation. The influence of left governments appears less strong: left governments shift the 
27 

========28========

burden not significantly less than conservative governments. 
Figure 4: Interaction effect between capital tax rates and union density on labor tax rates 
5 
. 
e 
t 
a 
r 
 
x 
a 
t 
 
l 
s 
a 
e 
t 
i 
t 
0 
a 
p 
r 
a 
 
c 
x 
 
a 
e 
t 
 
v 
r 
i 
t 
o 
c 
b 
e 
a 
5 
f 
l 
f 
. 
 
- 
e 
e 
 
f 
v 
i 
o 
t 
 
t 
c 
c 
e 
f 
e 
f 
f 
f 
e 
 
E 
n 
1 
 
l 
- 
o 
a 
n 
i 
g 
r 
a 
Mean of union_density_OECD 
M 
5 
. 
1 
- 
0 20 40 
Union Density Thick dashed lines give 95% confidence interval. 
60 
80 
Our estimates also support our prediction that tax rates especially on labor remain relatively 
high in countries in which the initial fiscal conditions were not very favorable to tax com- 
petition. However, in countries with high initial levels of social security transfers a 
government’s ability to aggressively reduce capital taxes in order to attract foreign capital 
depends on its ability to shift the tax burden towards labor, especially high salaries (initial 
conditions effect). Similarly and regardless of the initial fiscal conditions, large countries 
(measured by GDP) find it difficult to fully compete with small countries for internationally 
mobile capital. Large countries ceteris paribus implement higher tax rates on capital than 
smaller countries since the tax rate effect outweighs the tax base effect of possible capital 
inflows (country size effect). 
Our theory rests on the assumption that capital is not fully mobile. In order to turn this as- 
sumption into a testable hypothesis, we operationalize this de facto capital mobility by the 
size of the non-tradable service sector. The larger the non-tradable sector the less the average 
de facto mobility of capital and the easier it is for governments to implement higher tax rates. 
Indeed the empirical results support this notion – the larger the value added of the service 
sector the higher average effective capital tax rates remain. Once we control for actual capital 
28 

========29========

mobility by including the size of the service sector, the Quinn measure for de jure capital 
mobility turns out to be insignificant. 
At the second level (table 3), the fiscal policy adjustments, we generally observe substantively 
weaker effects. In other words, the effect of tax competition on fiscal policies remains 
moderate. We find that governments use higher labor taxes to maintain high levels social 
security transfers. However, while governments use capital taxation to stabilize government 
spending, we observe a positive but not significant contribution of capital taxation to social 
security transfers and an increase in the importance of labor taxation for social security 
transfers.13 In addition, governments need to maintain higher capital taxes in order to reduce 
initially high debt ratios. Country size affects fiscal policy mostly indirectly through taxation, 
the trade volume (which also captures a size effect) does not exert a significant impact on its 
own. 
13 We find mostly expected results for our controls. First, countries with majoritarian electoral systems have 
both lower social security and debt levels, which is consistent with previous results (Persson and Tabellini 
1999). Second, though we cannot solve the ‘old’ discussion between the compensation and the efficiency 
hypotheses, we find more support for the former: Openness to trade has a positive but not quire significant 
effect on social security transfers and public debt (compensation hypothesis). Third, higher unemployment 
rates and a larger dependency ratio increase the debt and social security spending equally. Fourth, EMU 
membership reduces a country’s debt ratio. 
29 

========30========

Table 3: Second Stage: Fiscal Policy 
VARIABLES 
difference between domestic capital tax rate and mean of capital tax rate in other countries difference between domestic labor tax rate 
and mean of labor tax rate in other countries Social Security Transfers as percentage of GDP in 1975 
debt ratio in 1975 
Union density (OECD) 
left cabinet portfolio as percentage of all cabinet seats 
EMU membership 
Majoritarion system (DPI) 
unemployment rate (WDI) 
share of population above 65 
trade ((imp+exp)/gdp) 
Constant 
Observations 
R-squared 
DWH Chi_sqr Test: Endogeneity of instrumented RHS variables 
Prob > Chi_sqr 
Anderson IV Relevance: LR Statistic 
Prob > Chi_sqr 
debt ratio -0.263** (0.062) 1.218** (0.147) -2.407** (0.221) 0.747** (0.021) -0.514** (0.061) -0.077** (0.015) -9.662** (1.711) -7.365** (2.036) 1.940** (0.166) 3.102** (0.295) 0.035 (0.027) 28.786** (7.835) 
537 
0.80 29.88 
social security transfers 
0.018 
(0.012) 
0.355** 
(0.029) 
0.082+ 
(0.044) 
-0.024** 
(0.004) 
-0.097** 
(0.012) 
-0.016** 
(0.003) 
0.263 
(0.342) 
-3.598** 
(0.405) 
0.120** 
(0.033) 
0.222** 
(0.059) 
0.007 
(0.005) 
16.084** 
(1.561) 
537 
0.63 
4.461 
0.000 121.3 0.000 
0.107 121.3 0.000 
Standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1, grey shaded cells indicate endogenous, 
instrumented right-hand-side variables 
Table 4 reports the relevant estimates and relates them to our theoretical predictions as 
summarized in table 1. We find that most estimated coefficients support our theory, though 
governments apparently use relatively high capital tax rates to keep public debt low and 
relatively high labor tax rates to keep social security transfers high. We did not expect that 
governments make this clear distinction between different sources of revenue, but these 
results are still broadly in line with our prediction that governments increasingly use labor 
taxes to finance social security transfers. 
Table 4: Determinants of Policy Adjustment 
capital tax rates 
labor tax rates 
country size 
+ 3.9 (±0.4) 
Public debt 
+ 1.5 (±0.3) 
.. 
social security transfers 
.. 
30 

========31========

low capital mobility 
initial transfer level 
initial debt 
relative capital tax 
+ 0.3 (±0.1) 
− .. 0 -0.9 (±0.1) 
0..+ 0.02 (±0.02) 
.. 
relative labor tax 
.. 
+ 0.7 (±0.1) 
+ 0.6 (±0.1) 
0..+ 0.01 (±0.01) 
.. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
− -2.4 (±0.2) 
+ 0.7 (±0.0) 
− -0.2 (±0.1) 
− 0.0 (±0.0) 
+ 0.1 (±0.0) 
− -0.2 (±0.0) 
+ 0.0 (±0.0) 
+ 0.4 (±0.0) 
Finally, at the third level (table 5), our results suggest that tax competition exerts a small but 
not negligible effect on income redistribution and income inequality though governments 
used relatively high tax rates to keep the fiscal policy adjustments moderate. However, this 
effect is contingent upon initial levels of social security and welfare spending. 
Table 5: Third Stage: Relative Redistribution and Disposable Income Inequality 
VARIABLES 
difference between domestic capital tax rate and mean of capital tax rate in other countries difference between domestic labor tax rate and mean of labor tax rate in other countries Majoritarion system (DPI) 
unemployment rate (WDI) 
share of population above 65 
market income inequality (gini) 
change in social security transfers as compared to 1975 
change in debt ratio as compared to 1975 
IA effect between mean difference in capital taxation and change in social security transfers† 
IA effect between mean difference in labor taxation and change in social security transfers† 
Constant 
Observations 
R-squared 
DWH Chi_sqr Test: Endogeneity of instrumented RHS variables 
Prob > Chi_sqr 
Anderson IV Relevance: LR Statistic 
Prob > Chi_sqr 
relative redistribution 
-0.003** (0.000) 0.006** (0.001) -0.011 (0.008) -0.002* (0.001) -0.007** (0.002) 0.778** (0.120) 0.006** (0.001) -0.000 (0.000) 0.014 (0.009) -0.033** (0.011) 0.157** (0.052) 
537 0.37 22.47 
disposable income 
inequality 
0.001** 
(0.000) 
-0.002** 
(0.000) 
0.005 
(0.004) 
0.001+ 
(0.000) 
0.003** 
(0.001) 
0.299** 
(0.052) 
-0.002** 
(0.000) 
0.000 
(0.000) 
-0.006 
(0.004) 
0.014** 
(0.005) 
0.090** 
(0.023) 
537 
0.34 
23.73 
0.000 375.2 0.000 
0.000 375.2 0.000 
Standard errors in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1, grey shaded cells indicate endogenous, instrumented right-hand-side variables; † coefficients and standard errors shown times 100 – for better 
readability 
31 

========32========

Countries which redistribute income mostly via social transfers will use higher tax rates on 
capital to redistribute from capital owners to wage earners and thereby reduce income 
inequality or at least do not allow disposable income inequality to rise – figure 5 illustrates 
this effect. Thus, when social welfare states implement relatively high capital and labor tax 
rates, fiscal policy adjustments will be moderate and the effect of tax competition on 
redistribution and inequality small. The same cannot be said for countries that dominantly 
redistribute via a progressive tax system. Even if these countries kept relatively high capital 
and labor taxes, income redistribution declined and inequality increased (see figures 5 and 6). 
Thus, social security transfers offered a better way to prevent an increase in income inequa- 
lity. This finding, of course runs counter the doom theories of tax competition, which 
predicted that governments have to abandon the welfare state to prevent capital flight. 
Figure 5: Interaction effect between mean difference in capital tax rates and change in social security transfers on disposable income inequality 
e 
t 
3 
a 
r 
0 
 
0 
x 
. 
a 
t 
 
l 
a 
t 
i 
y 
t 
p 
i 
l 
a 
a 
c 
 
u 
2 
n 
q 
i 
0 
 
e 
0 
e 
n 
i 
. 
c 
 
n 
e 
e 
r 
m 
e 
o 
f 
f 
c 
i 
n 
d 
i 
 
 
n 
e 
l 
1 
a 
b 
0 
e 
a 
0 
. 
s 
m 
 
o 
f 
p 
o 
 
s 
t 
i 
c 
d 
 
e 
f 
n 
f 
o 
E 
 
l 
a 
0 
n 
i 
g 
r 
a 
Mean of d75_sstran 
M 
-10 -5 0 5 10 
change in social security transfers as compared to 1975 Thick dashed lines give 95% confidence interval. 
15 
Figure 6: Interaction effect between mean difference in labor tax rates and change in social security transfers on disposable income inequality 
32 

========33========

2 
0 
0 
x 
. 
a 
t 
 
r 
o 
b 
a 
y 
l 
t 
 
i 
l 
n 
i 
a 
 
0 
u 
e 
q 
c 
e 
n 
n 
e 
i 
 
r 
e 
e 
f 
f 
i 
m 
d 
o 
2 
 
c 
0 
n 
n 
i 
0 
a 
 
. 
- 
e 
e 
l 
m 
b 
 
f 
a 
o 
s 
 
t 
o 
c 
p 
e 
s 
4 
f 
i 
f 
0 
d 
 
0 
E 
. 
 
l 
n 
- 
a 
o 
n 
i 
g 
r 
a 
Mean of d75_sstran 
6 
M 
0 
0 
. 
- 
-10 -5 0 5 10 
change in social security transfers as compared to 1975 Thick dashed lines give 95% confidence interval. 
15 
Most of the empirical findings – even cautiously interpreted – supports our theoretical 
arguments. We find a non-negligible and significant tax competition effect in addition to a 
strong tax system effect, a shift from capital to labor taxes, which is damped by political 
institutions such as strong unions. Moreover we find support for asymmetric tax competition, 
a significant country size effect. Small countries implement both lower tax rates on capital 
and labor. They are able to do so because the tax base effect of inflowing capital outweighs 
the tax rate effect of lowering capital tax rate. Yet, tax rates are not completely determined by 
competition since capital is not fully mobile: our results show that where de facto capital 
mobility is low – the size of the non-tradable sector large – tax rates on capital remain 
comparatively higher. 
In countries with noncompetitively high tax rates, tax revenues are used to lower initially high 
debt and maintain social security spending. Governments in large welfare states did not 
reduce the initially high social security transfers but managed to keep social welfare spending 
on a comparatively high level. However, initially large public debt forced government to 
reduce social security transfers at least slightly. 
Finally, the effect of tax rates on redistribution and inequality is conditioned on changes in 
33 

========34========

welfare state spending: countries predominantly redistributing via progressive taxes 
experience an increase in inequality because of the tax competition effect, while countries 
which redistribute mainly via social spending reduce disposable income inequality or at least 
keep it stable. Table 6 compares the theoretical predictions with the empirical findings of the 
last stage. 
Table 6: Impact of Policy Adjustments on Redistribution and Income Inequality 
pre-tax income inequality 
social security transfers as compared to initial level 
change in social security transfers*relative effective capital tax rate 
change in social security transfers*relative effective labor tax rate 
7. Conclusion 
redistribution 
+ 0.778 (±0.120) 
+ 0.006 (±0.001) 
+ 0.014 (±0.009) 
− -0.033 (±0.011) 
disposable income 
inequality 
.. 
− -0.002 (±0.000) 
− -0.006 (±0.004) 
+ 0.014 (±0.005) 
When confronted with tax competition, governments in different countries choose different 
policy adjustment strategies. Surprisingly, neither empirical tests of tax competition, nor 
empirical tests of globalization theories, nor existing tests of explanations for the survival of 
the welfare state take into account that global competition does not affect all countries in the 
same way. 
We have argued that tax competition affects countries that redistribute via the tax system 
differently from countries that redistribute via social security transfers. Indeed, quite to the 
contrary of the predictions of early globalization theories of welfare state retrenchment, we 
argue and find that liberal market economies that use the tax system to redistribute income 
found it more difficult to adjust to tax competition. Most welfare states merely shifted 
revenues from taxing capital onto labor and maintained high levels of social security transfers. 
Thus, tax competition influences tax and fiscal policies, but not in the simple, homogeneous 
fashion predicted by previous theories. Rather, the absence of perfect capital mobility leads to 
34 

========35========

‘separating equilibria’, some governments compensated for capital outflows by maintaining 
high capital and even higher labor tax rates. An increase in debt and cuts in social security 
transfers are used as alternatives to increasing capital and labor tax rates. 
These initial conditions and the choice of policy adjustment strategies ultimately explained 
why income inequality rose more in liberal market economies than in Continental welfare 
states. While the latter countries could maintain a high level of social security transfers, the 
liberal economies had to cut down on tax-based redistribution and to increase social security 
transfers. Not all governments in liberal market economies were able or willing to do so. 
Accordingly, income inequality increased most in liberal economies whose governments did 
not or very little increase social security transfers: the US and the UK. 
Literature 
Allan, James P. and Lyle Scruggs 2004, Political Partisanship and Welfare State Reform in 
Advanced Industrial Societies, American Journal of Political Science, 48(3), 496-512. Basinger, Scott and Mark Hallerberg 2004, Remodelling the Competition for Capital. How 
Domestic Politics erases the Race to the Bottom, American Political Science Review 
98, 261-276. 
Birchfeld, Vicki and Markus M. L. Crepaz 1998, The Impact of Constitutional Structures and 
Collective and Competitive Veto Points on Income Inequality in Industrialized Demo- 
cracies, European Journal of Political Research 34, 175-200. 
Bradley, David, Evelyn Huber, Stephanie Moller, Francois Nielsen, and John D. Stephens, 
2003. Distribution and redistribution in Postindustrial Democracies, World Politics 55, 
193-228. 
Bräuninger, Thomas 2005. A Partisan Model of Government Expenditure. Public Choice 125: 
409-429. 
Browning, E. K. 1975. Collective Choice and General Fund Financing. Journal of Political 
Economy 83: 377-390 
Bucovetsky, Sam 1991, Asymmetric Tax Competition, Journal of Urban Economics 30, 67- 
181. 
Cameron, David R. 1978. Expansion of the Public Economy: Comparative Analysis. 
American Political Science Review 72: 1243-1261. 
Crepaz, Markus M.L. and Ann W. Moser 2004, The Impact of Collective and Competitive 
Veto Points on Public Expenditures in the Global Age, Comparative Political Studies 
27, 259-285. 
Esping-Andersen, Gøsta 1996. Welfare States in Transition. National Adaptations in Global 
Economies, SAGE, London. 
35 

========36========

Franzese, Robert J. 2002, Macroeconomic Policies of Developed Democracies, Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Franzese, Robert J. and Jude C. Hays 2007, Spatial Econometric Models of Cross-Sectional 
Interdependence in Political Science Panel and Time-Series-Cross-Section Data, 
Political Analysis 15, 140-164. 
Galasso Vicenzo and Paola Profeta 2002. The Political Economy of Social Security. A 
Survey. European Journal of Political Economy 18, 1-29. 
Ganghof, Steffen 2006. Tax Mixes and the Size of the Welfare State, Journal of European 
Social Policy 16, 360-374. 
Garrett, Geoffrey, 1998a, Global Markets and National Politics: Collision Course or Virtuous 
Circle?, International Organization, 52/4, 787–824. 
Garrett, Geoffrey, 1998b, Partisan Politics in the Global Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Genschel, Philipp, 2002, Globalization, Tax Competition, and the Welfare State, Politics and 
Society, 30, 245-275. 
Ha, Eunyoung 2008. Globalization, veto players, and welfare spending. Comparative Political 
Studies 41: 783-813 
Hall, Peter and David Soskice, 2001. An Introduction to the Varieties of Capitalism. In: Peter 
A. Hall, David Soskice (eds.): Varieties of Capitalism. The Institutional Foundations 
of Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001, 1-68. 
Hallerberg, Mark and Scott Basinger 1998. Internationalization and Changes in Tax Policy in 
OECD Countries: The Importance of Domestic Veto Players, Comparative Political 
Studies 31, 321-353. 
Hansson, I. and C. Stuart 1989. Social Security as Trade among Living Generations. 
American Economic Review 79: 1182-1195. 
Hays, Jude C. 2003. Globalization and Capital Taxation in Consensus and Majoritarian De- 
mocracies, World Politics 56, 79-113. 
Hays, Jude C. 2008, Globalization, Domestic Institutions, and the New Politics of Embedded 
Liberalism, Oxford University Press, forthcoming. 
Hicks, Alexander M. and Duane Swank, 1992, Politics, Institutions, and Welfare Spending in 
Industrialized Democracies, 1960-82, American Political Science Review 86, 658-674. Hines, James R. 2006, Will Social Welfare Expenditures survive Tax Competition? Oxford 
Review of Economic Policy 22, 330-348. 
Huber, Evelyn and John D. Stephens 1993, Political Parties and Public Pensions. A Quantita- 
tive Analysis, Acta Sociologica 36, 309-325. 
Huber, Evelyn and John D. Stephens 2001, Development and Crisis of the Welfare State, 
Chicago University Press, Chicago. 
Iversen, Torben and David Soskice 2006, Electoral Institutions and the Politics of Coalitions: 
Why some Democracies Redistribute more than others, American Political Science 
Review 100 (2), 165-181. 
Iversen, Torben and Thomas R. Cusack 2000, The Causes of Welfare State Expansion. Dein- 
dustrialization or Globalization? World Politics 52, 313-349. 
Iversen, Torben 1999, Wage Bargaining, Central Bank Independence, and the Real Effects of 
Money, International Organization 53, 629-629. 
36 

========37========

Iversen, Torben 2001, The Dynamics of Welfare State Expansion: Trade Openness, Deindus- 
trialization, and Partisan Politics, in: Paul Pierson, ed., the New Politics of Welfare 
State, Oxford University Press. 
Kanbur, Ravi and Michael Keen 1993, Jeux Sans Frontier: Tax Competition and Tax Coordi- 
nation when Countries Differ in Size, American Economic Review 83, 877-892. Kenworthy, Lane, and Jonas Pontusson 2005, Rising Inequality and the Politics of 
Redistribution in Affluent Countries, Perspectives on Politics 3 (3), 449-371. Neumayer, Eric and Thomas Plümper, 2012. Conditional Spatial Policy Dependence: Theory 
and Model Specification, Comparative Political Studies. 
Oatley, Thomas 1999, How Constraining is Capital Mobility? The Partisan Hypothesis in an 
Open Economy, American Journal of Political Science, 43, 1003-1027. 
Peralta, Susana and Tanguy van Ypersele 2005, Factor Endowments and Welfare Levels in an 
Asymmetric Tax Competition Game, Journal of Urban Economics 57, 258-274. Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini 1999, The Size and Scope of Government: Comparative 
Politics with Rational Politicians, European Economic Review 43, 699-735. Pierson, Paul 1996. The new politics of the welfare state. World Politics 48: 143-& Pierson, Paul 1998. Irresistible forces, immovable objects: post-industrial welfare states 
confront permanent austerity. Journal of European Public Policy 5: 539-560. Plümper, Thomas and Eric Neumayer 2009, Model Specification in the Analysis of Spatial 
Dependence, European Journal of Political Research 49, 418-442. 
Plümper, Thomas and Vera E. Troeger 2007, Efficient Estimation of Time Invariant and Ra- 
rely Changing Variables in Panel Data with Unit Effects, Political Analysis 15, 124- 
139. 
Plümper, Thomas and Vera E. Troeger 2011, Fixed Effects Vector Decomposition: 
Properties, Reliability, Instruments, Political Analysis 19, 147-162. 
Plümper, Thomas, Vera E. Troeger and Philip Manow 2005, Panel Data Analysis in Compa- 
rative Politics: Linking Method to Theory, European Journal of Political Research 44, 
327-354. 
Plümper, Thomas, Vera E. Troeger and Hannes Winner 2009, Why is there no Race to the 
Bottom in Capital Taxation? Tax Competition among Countries of Unequal Size, Dif- 
ferent Levels of Budget Rigidities and Heterogeneous Fairness Norms, International 
Studies Quarterly 53: 781-786. 
Pontusson, Jonas 2005. Inequality and Prosperity. Social Europe versus Liberal America, 
Cornell University Press, Ithaca. 
Rodrik, Dani 1998. Why do more open Economies have bigger Governments? Journal of 
Political Economy 106: 997-1032. 
Rudra, Nita 2002. Globalization and the Decline of the Welfare State in less-developed 
Countries. International Organization 56: 411-+. 
Rudra, Nita and Stephen Haggard 2001, Globalization, Democracy, and Effective Spending in 
the Developing World, Comparative Political Studies 38, 1015-1049. 
Samuelson, Paul 1958. Aspects of Public Expenditure Theories. Review of Economics and 
Statistics 40, 332-+. 
Scharpf, Fritz W. 1991. Crisis and Choice in European Social Democracy, Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press. 
37 

========38========

Scharpf, Fritz W. 1997. Economic Integration, Democracy, and the Welfare State, Journal of 
European Public Policy 4, 8-36. 
Steinmo, Sven 1994. The End of Redistribution? International Pressures and Domestic Tax 
Policy. Challenge 37, 9-17. 
Swank, Duane and Sven Steinmo 2002, The New Political Economy of Taxation in Advanced 
Capitalist Democracies, American Journal of Political Science 46, 642-655. Swank, Duane 1998, Funding the Welfare State: Globalization and the Taxation of Business 
in Advanced Market Economies, Political Studies 46, 671-692. 
Swank, Duane 2002, Global Capital, Political Institutions and Policy Change in Developed 
Welfare States, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Swank, Duane 2004, Tax Policy in an Era of Internationalization: An Assessment of a Condi- 
tional Diffusion Model of the Spread of Neoliberalism. Presented at the Conference on 
“International Diffusion of Political and Exonomic Liberalization”, Harvard October 
3-4, 2003. 
Swank, Duane 2006, Tax Policy in an Era of Internationalization: Explaining the Spread of 
Neoliberalism, International Organization 60, 847-882. 
Tsebelis, George and E.C.C. Chang 2004. Veto Players and the Structure of Budgets in 
Advanced Industrialized Countries. European Journal of Political Research 43: 449- 
476. 
Wilson, John D. 1991, Tax Competition with Interregional Differences in Factor Endow- 
ments, Regional Science and Urban Economics 21, 423-451. 
38 

========39========

Appendix 1: Operationalization and Data Sources 
Table A1: Variable Description 
Variable captax labtax 
Description 
Average effective tax rate on capital 
Average effective tax rate on labor 
captaxi;-i 
Difference between domestic capital tax rate and average capital tax rate in all other countries in the 
same year 
captax-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of average 
effective capital tax rates 
labtaxi;-i 
Difference between domestic labor tax rate and average labor tax rate in all other countries in the 
debt idebt di75_debt socsec isocsec 
same year 
Debt as percentage of GDP Initial Debt ratio (1975) 
change in debt ratio as compared to 1975 Social Security Transfers as percentage of GDP Initial Social Security Transfers as percentage of 
GDP (1975) 
di75_socsec 
change in social security transfers as compared to 
loggdp trade 
unemp pop65 ud left 
1975 
Natural Logarithm of GDP Trade openness measured as (exports+imports)/GDP Unemployment rate 
Share of population aged 65 and over 
Union Density 
Left cabinet portfolio as percentage of all cabinet 
portfolios 
nt 
maj 
Size of the non-tradable sector, measure as value added of the service sector as percentage of GDP Electoral system: Plurality (1), Proportional (0) 
emu ginidi, ginipsi 
Member of the European Monetary Union income inequality, disposable income, private 
sector income 
reldis 
difference between pre-tax and post-tax income 
quinni quinn-i 
inequality 
legal capital account openness 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of legal 
capital account openness 
ginipsi-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of private 
sector income inequality 
gdppc-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of per capita 
GDP 
govcon-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of 
Government consumption 
trade-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of trade 
openness: (exports+imports)/ GDP 
pop-i 
inverse distance weighted spatial lag of total 
population 
Source 
Calculations from OECD Revenue Statistics based on formula provided by Volkerink and DeHaan (2002) 
Own calculations base don the above variables 
estimated in an instrumental variable equation calculated based on average effective labor tax rates 
OECD Main Economic Indicators 
OECD Main Economic Indicators 
world development indicators, world bank 
OECD labor market statistics Swank 2002 
OECD National Account Statistics 
Beck et al. 2005: World Bank database of Political Institutions 
Mahler and Jesuit 2006, Luxembourg Income Study 
Quinn 1997 
Mahler and Jesuit 2006, Luxembourg Income Study World Bank World Development Indicators 
FDI inflows form WDI 
39 

========40========

Appendix 2: Estimation of the System of Simultaneous Equations 
We estimate six simultaneous equations with correlated error processes across all equations. 
In addition, we include a spatial capital tax lag in order to account for the tax competition 
arguments. This spatial lag is weighted substantively by the inverted distance in order to 
account for higher impact of closer countries and instrumented by the equally weighted 
spatial lags of domestic variables (Franzese and Hays 2007; Plümper and Neumayer 2009). 
Our theory predicts endogeneity issues since the labor tax depends on capital taxation (tax 
system effect), fiscal policies (debt ratio and social security transfers) depend on capital and 
labor taxation and redistribution as well as income inequality are partially determined by a 
combination of taxation and fiscal policies. We thus estimate the system of equations by a 
combination of three stage least squares and two stage least squares (for the spatial tax lag) 
procedures. 
Table A2: System of equations 
Stage 1: 
captaxi = a + captax-i + loggdpi + udi + lefti + nti + isocseci + idebti+ quinni +ei with 
captax-i= a + quinn-i + gini-i + gdppc-i + govcon-i + trade-i + population-i + e-i as instrumental equation. 
labtaxi = a + captaxi + loggdpi + udi + lefti + captaxi *udi + captaxi *lefti + isocseci + idebti + ei 
Stage 2: 
debti = a + captaxi;-i + labtaxi;-i + udi + lefti + maji + unempi + pop65i + tradei + emui + isocseci + idebti + ei 
socseci= a + captaxi;-i+ labtaxi;-i+ udi+ lefti+ maji+ unempi+ pop65i+ tradei+ emui+ isocseci+ idebti+ ei 
Stage 3: 
redisi = a + captaxi;-i + labtaxi;-i + captaxi;-i · di75_socseci + labtaxi;-i · di75_socseci + maji + di75_debti + 
di75_socseci + ginipsii + unempi + pop65i + ei 
ginidii = a + captaxi;-i + labtaxi;-i + captaxi;-i · di75_socseci + labtaxi;-i · di75_socseci + maji + di75_debti + 
di75_socseci + ginipsii + unempi + pop65i + ei 
Subscripts denote countries (i) other countries (-i). 
40 

========41========

Appendix 3: Identification and Exclusion Restrictions 
Given this set of endogenous variables we need at least 42 exclusion restrictions for the 6 
equations to be just identified (without relying on cross equation identification). Each of the 6 
equations has one normalization restriction because one variable is taken to be the left-hand- 
side explained variable. Thus, each equation in our system is autonomous because it has 
substantive meaning in isolation from the other equations in the system. Since we have 
enough exclusion restrictions within each structural equation we do not need to rely on cross 
equation restrictions to achieve identification of our system. Table A2 shows that we have 
117 exclusion restrictions from which 32 are simultaneous. Thus, we have 85 exclusion 
restrictions throughout the system which are distributed in a way so that every single equation 
is at least identified under the condition that all variables labelled exogenous are indeed 
uncorrelated with any of the error terms of the seven equations. 
We used standard (but often not very powerful) overidentification and exogeneity tests. 
Overidentification of all equations in the system allows for a more efficient estimation of the 
structural parameters. However, since the exclusion restrictions imply that the coefficients of 
these variables are zero in the equations from which they are excluded, misspecification leads 
to biased parameter estimates. A more reliable test is to compare the 3-SLS results to a set of 
independent 2-SLS estimates. If all equations in the system are correctly specified, system 
procedures are asymptotically more efficient than a single-equation procedure such as 2SLS. 
Yet, single equation models are more robust with respect to miss-specification. W estimate a 
2SLS version of our model which turns out to give substantively identical results. Neither 
tests suggest that our model is misspecified. 
41 

========42========

Appendix 4: Robustness 
debt ratio 
Table A4a: 3 Stage Least Squares: Trend included 
average 
effective 
labor tax 
average effective capital tax 
rate 255.544** 
rate 
spatial capital tax lag weighted by inverse distance (prediction) / effective capital tax rate (labor tax equation) 
total GDP in current US$, natural logarithm 
Social Security Transfers as percentage of GDP in 1975 debt ratio in 1975 
-0.960** 
(45.962) 
(0.154) 
3.237** (0.387) -1.231** (0.126) 0.016 (0.014) 0.859** 
1.123** (0.316) 0.697** (0.076) 
0.007 
value added of service sector as percentage of GDP 
(0.010) 0.633** 
Union density (OECD) 
(0.105) 0.025 (0.024) 
(0.083) -0.150* (0.069) 
left cabinet portfolio as percentage 
of all cabinet seats 
IA effect between capital tax rate and left 
IA effect between capital tax rate and union density 
legal capital mobility (Quinn) 
0.007 
(0.022) 
0.001 
(0.001) 0.016** (0.003) 
4.362** (0.813) 
difference between domestic capital tax rate and mean of capital tax rate 
in other countries 
difference between domestic labor tax rate and mean of labor tax rate in other countries 
EMU membership 
Majoritarion system (DPI) 
unemployment rate (WDI) 
share of population above 65 
trade ((imp+exp)/gdp) 
market income inequality (gini) 
change in social security transfers as compared to 1975 
change in debt ratio as compared to 
1975 
IA effect between mean difference in capital taxation and change in social security transfers† IA effect between mean difference in labor taxation and change in social security transfers† trend 
0.058 
Constant 
-0.786** (0.079) -98.074** 
(0.058) -27.731** 
social security transfers 
relative redistribution 
disposable income inequality 
-1.934** (0.220) 0.765** (0.020) 
0.115* (0.046) -0.024** (0.004) 
-0.322** (0.064) -0.073** 
-0.081** (0.013) -0.015** 
(0.014) 
(0.003) 
-0.169** 
0.034** 
-0.004** 
0.002** 
(0.062) 1.064** 
(0.013) 0.342** 
(0.000) 0.003** 
(0.000) -0.001** 
(0.140) -5.061** (1.747) -6.852** (1.917) 1.977** (0.156) 2.020** (0.332) -0.069* (0.029) 
(0.029) 0.626+ (0.363) -3.513** (0.397) 0.112** (0.032) 0.130+ (0.069) 0.002 (0.006) 
(0.001) 
(0.000) 
-0.015* (0.008) -0.003** (0.001) 0.001 (0.002) 
0.007* (0.003) 0.001** (0.000) -0.000 (0.001) 
1.057** (0.115) 0.006** (0.001) 0.000* 
0.178** (0.050) -0.003** (0.000) -0.000+ 
(0.000) 0.000** 
(0.000) -0.000** 
(0.000) -0.000 
(0.000) 0.000 
0.596** (0.095) 18.509* 
0.048* (0.020) 15.251** 
(0.000) -0.004** (0.001) 0.026 
(0.000) 0.002** (0.000) 0.146** 
42 

========43========

Observations R-squared 
(9.799) 537 0.38 
(7.314) 537 0.58 
(7.497) 537 0.82 
(1.553) 537 0.64 
(0.051) 537 0.44 
(0.022) 537 0.41 
Table A4b: 3 Stage Least Squares: Lagged Residuals 
spatial capital tax lag weighted by inverse distance (prediction) / effective capital tax rate (labor tax equation) 
total GDP in current US$, natural logarithm 
Social Security Transfers as percentage of GDP in 1975 debt ratio in 1975 
value added of service sector as percentage of GDP 
Union density (OECD) 
left cabinet portfolio as percentage 
of all cabinet seats 
IA effect between capital tax rate and left 
IA effect between capital tax rate and union density 
legal capital mobility (Quinn) 
difference between domestic capital tax rate and mean of capital tax rate 
in other countries 
difference between domestic labor tax rate and mean of labor tax rate 
in other countries 
EMU membership 
Majoritarion system (DPI) 
unemployment rate (WDI) 
share of population above 65 
trade ((imp+exp)/gdp) 
market income inequality (gini) 
change in social security transfers as compared to 1975 
change in debt ratio as compared to 
1975 
IA effect between mean difference in capital taxation and change 
in social security transfers† IA effect between mean 
average effective capital tax 
rate 259.636** 
average effective labor tax 
rate -1.207** 
debt ratio 
(14.782) 
(0.037) 
3.577** (0.131) -0.942** (0.041) 0.022** (0.005) 0.323** 
1.266** (0.110) 0.568** (0.026) 0.011** (0.004) 0.734** 
-2.489** (0.081) 0.754** (0.009) 
(0.030) 0.037** (0.008) 
(0.021) -0.231** (0.017) -0.031** 
-0.558** (0.022) -0.080** 
(0.007) 0.002** (0.000) 0.019** (0.001) 
(0.006) 
0.977** (0.236) 
-0.327** 
(0.025) 1.349** 
(0.048) -11.073** (0.680) -7.810** (0.814) 2.054** (0.066) 3.072** (0.115) 0.015 (0.011) 
social security transfers 
relative redistribution 
disposable income inequality 
0.031+ (0.018) -0.025** (0.002) 
-0.108** (0.005) -0.015** 
(0.001) 
0.020** 
-0.003** 
0.001** 
(0.005) 0.385** 
(0.000) 0.005** 
(0.000) -0.002** 
(0.011) 0.137 (0.150) -3.841** (0.179) 0.090** (0.015) 0.218** (0.025) 0.006** (0.002) 
(0.001) 
(0.000) 
-0.016* (0.007) -0.003** (0.001) -0.007** (0.001) 
0.007* (0.003) 0.001** (0.000) 0.003** (0.001) 
0.981** (0.102) 0.005** (0.001) 0.000 
0.212** (0.043) -0.002** (0.000) 0.000 
(0.000) 0.000+ 
(0.000) -0.000+ 
(0.000) -0.000** 
(0.000) 0.000** 
43 

========44========

difference in labor taxation and change 
in social security transfers† ar1: lagged residuals 
Constant 
0.926** (0.014) -85.523** (3.364) 
0.943** (0.017) -27.521** (2.692) 
0.972** (0.018) 33.214** (2.796) 
0.927** (0.019) 17.666** (0.627) 
(0.000) 0.486** (0.027) 0.075+ (0.044) 
(0.000) 0.495** (0.027) 0.124** (0.019) 
Observations R-squared 
513 0.93 
513 0.94 
513 0.97 
513 0.93 
513 0.58 
513 0.57 
44 

========45========

